About Being Careful
===================

<span class="dropcaps-first" markdown="1">T</span><span
class="dropcaps-words" markdown="1">he Buddha taught to
see</span>&nbsp; the body in the body. What does this mean? We are all
familiar with the parts of the body such as hair, nails, teeth and skin.
So how do we see the body in the body? If we recognize all these things
as being impermanent, unsatisfactory and not-self, that’s what is called
‘seeing the body in the body’. Then it isn’t necessary to go into detail
and meditate on the separate parts. It’s like having fruit in a basket.
If we have already counted the pieces of fruit, then we know what’s
there, and when we need to, we can pick up the basket and take it away,
and all the pieces come with it. We know the fruit is all there, so we
don’t have to count it again.

Having meditated on the thirty-two parts of the body, and recognized
them as something not stable or permanent, we no longer need to weary
ourselves separating them like this and meditating in such detail; just
as we don’t have to dump all the fruit out of the basket and count it
again and again. But we do carry the basket along to our destination,
walking mindfully and carefully, taking care not to stumble and fall.

When we see the body in the body, which means we see the Dhamma in the
body, knowing our own and others’ bodies as impermanent phenomena, we
don’t need detailed explanations. Sitting here, we have mindfulness
constantly in control, knowing things as they are. Meditation then
becomes quite simple. It’s the same if we meditate on *Buddho* – if we
understand what *Buddho* really is, we don’t need to repeat the word
*‘Buddho’*. It means having full knowledge and firm awareness. This is
meditation.

Still, meditation is generally not well understood. We practise in a
group, but we often don’t know what it’s all about. Some people think
meditation is really hard to do. ‘I come to the monastery, but I can’t
sit. I don’t have much endurance. My legs hurt, my back aches, I’m in
pain all over.’ So they give up on it and don’t come anymore, thinking
they can’t do it.

But in fact samādhi is not sitting. Samādhi isn’t walking. It isn’t
lying down or standing. Sitting, walking, closing the eyes, opening the
eyes, these are all mere actions. Having your eyes closed doesn’t
necessarily mean you’re practising samādhi. It could just mean that
you’re drowsy and dull. If you’re sitting with your eyes closed but
you’re falling asleep, your head bobbing all over and your mouth hanging
open, that’s not sitting in samādhi. It’s sitting with your eyes closed.
Samādhi and closed eyes are two separate matters. Real samādhi can be
practised with eyes open or eyes closed. You can be sitting, walking,
standing or lying down.

Samādhi means the mind is firmly focused, with all-encompassing
mindfulness, restraint, and caution. You are constantly aware of right
and wrong, constantly watching all conditions arising in the mind. When
it shoots off to think of something, having a mood of aversion or
longing, you are aware of that. Some people get discouraged: ‘I just
can’t do it. As soon as I sit, my mind starts thinking of home. That’s
evil (Thai: *bahp*)’. Hey! If just that much is evil, the Buddha never
would have become Buddha. He spent five years struggling with his mind,
thinking of his home and his family. It was only after six years that he
awakened.

So, some people feel that these sudden arisings of thought are wrong or
evil. You may have an impulse to kill someone. But you are aware of it
in the next instant, you realize that killing is wrong, so you stop and
refrain. Is there harm in this? What do you think? Or if you have a
thought about stealing something and that is followed by a stronger
recollection that to do so is wrong, and so you refrain from acting on
it – is that bad kamma It’s not that every time you have an impulse you
instantly accumulate bad kamma. Otherwise, how could there be any way to
liberation? Impulses are merely impulses. Thoughts are merely thoughts.
In the first instance, you haven’t created anything yet. In the second
instance, if you act on it with body, speech or mind, then you are
creating something. *Avijjā* has taken control. If you have the impulse
to steal and then you are aware of yourself and aware that this would be
wrong, this is wisdom, and there is *vijjā* instead. The mental impulse
is not consummated.

This is timely awareness, wisdom arising and informing our experience.
If there is the first mind-moment of wanting to steal something and then
we act on it, that is the dhamma of delusion; the actions of body,
speech and mind that follow the impulse will bring negative results.

This is how it is. Merely having the thoughts is not negative kamma. If
we don’t have any thoughts, how will wisdom develop? Some people simply
want to sit with a blank mind. That’s wrong understanding.

I’m talking about samādhi that is accompanied by wisdom. In fact, the
Buddha didn’t wish for a lot of samādhi. He didn’t want *jhāna* and
*samāpatti.* He saw samādhi as one component factor of the path. Sīla,
samādhi and paññā are components or ingredients, like ingredients used
in cooking. We use spices in cooking to make food tasty. The point isn’t
the spices themselves, but the food we eat. Practising samādhi is the
same. The Buddha’s teachers, Uddaka and Ālāra, put heavy emphasis on
practising the *jhāna*, and attaining various kinds of powers like
clairvoyance. But if you get that far, it’s hard to undo. Some places
teach this deep tranquillity, to sit with delight in quietude. The
meditators then get intoxicated by their samādhi. If they have sīla,
they get intoxicated by their sīla. If they walk the path, they become
intoxicated by the path, dazzled by the beauty and wonders they
experience, and they don’t reach the real destination.

The Buddha said that this is a subtle error. Still, it’s correct for
those on a coarse level. But actually what the Buddha wanted was for us
to have an appropriate measure of samādhi, without getting stuck there.
After we train in and develop samādhi, then samādhi should develop
wisdom.

Samādhi that is on the level of samatha – tranquillity – is like a rock
covering grass. In samādhi that is sure and stable, even when the eyes
are opened, wisdom is there. When wisdom has been born, it encompasses
and knows (‘rules’) all things. So the Teacher did not want those
refined levels of concentration and cessation, because they become a
diversion and then one forgets the path.

So it is necessary not to be attached to sitting or any other particular
posture. Samādhi doesn’t reside in having the eyes closed, the eyes
open, or in sitting, standing, walking or lying down. Samādhi pervades
all postures and activities. Older persons, who often can’t sit very
well, can contemplate especially well and practise samādhi easily; they
too can develop a lot of wisdom.

How is it that they can develop wisdom? Everything is rousing them. When
they open their eyes, they don’t see things as clearly as they used to.
Their teeth give them trouble and fall out. Their bodies ache most of
the time. Just that is the place of study. So really, meditation is easy
for old folks. Meditation is hard for youngsters. Their teeth are
strong, so they can enjoy their food. They sleep soundly. Their
faculties are intact and the world is fun and exciting to them, so they
get deluded in a big way. When the old ones chew on something hard
they’re soon in pain. Right there the *devadūta* are talking to them;
they’re teaching them every day. When they open their eyes their sight
is fuzzy. In the morning their backs ache. In the evening their legs
hurt. That’s it! This is really an excellent subject to study. Some of
you older people will say you can’t meditate. What do you want to
meditate on? Who will you learn meditation from?

This is seeing the body in the body and sensation in sensation. Are you
seeing these or are you running away? Saying you can’t practise because
you’re too old is only due to wrong understanding. The question is, are
things clear to you? Elderly persons have a lot of thinking, a lot of
sensation, a lot of discomfort and pain. Everything appears! If they
meditate, they can really testify to it. So I say that meditation is
easy for old folks. They can do it best. Everyone says ‘When I’m old,
I’ll go to the monastery.’ If you understand this, it’s true all right.
You have to see it within yourself. When you sit, it’s true; when you
stand up, it’s true; when you walk, it’s true. Everything is a hassle,
everything is presenting obstacles – and everything is teaching you.
Isn’t this so? Can you just get up and walk away so easily now? When you
stand up, it’s ‘Oy!’ Or haven’t you noticed? And it’s ‘Oy!’ when you
walk. It’s prodding you.

When you’re young you can just stand up and walk, going on your way. But
you don’t really know anything. When you’re old, every time you stand up
it’s ‘Oy!’ Isn’t that what you say? ‘Oy! Oy!’ Every time you move, you
learn something. So how can you say it’s difficult to meditate? Where
else is there to look? It’s all correct. The *devadūta* are telling you
something. It’s most clear. *Saṅkhārā* are telling you that they are not
stable or permanent, not you or yours. They are telling you this every
moment.

But we think differently. We don’t think that this is right. We
entertain wrong view and our ideas are far from the truth. But actually,
old people can see impermanence, suffering and lack of self, and give
rise to dispassion and disenchantment – because the evidence is right
there within them all the time. I think that’s good.

Having the inner sensitivity that is always aware of right and wrong is
called *Buddho*. It’s not necessary to be continually repeating
*‘Buddho’*. You’ve counted the fruit in your basket. Every time you sit
down, you don’t have to go to the trouble of spilling out the fruit and
counting it again. You can leave it in the basket. But someone with
mistaken attachment will keep counting. He’ll stop under a tree, spill
it out and count, and put it back in the basket. Then he’ll walk on to
the next stopping place and do it again. But he’s just counting the same
fruit. This is craving itself. He’s afraid that if he doesn’t count,
there will be some mistake. We are afraid that if we don’t keep saying
*‘Buddho’*, we’ll be mistaken. How are we mistaken? Only the person who
doesn’t know how much fruit there is needs to count. Once you know, you
can take it easy and just leave it in the basket. When you’re sitting,
you just sit. When you’re lying down, you just lie down because your
fruit is all there with you.

By practising virtue and creating merit, we say, ‘*Nibbāna paccayo
hotu*’, (may it be a condition for realizing Nibbāna). As a condition
for realizing Nibbāna, making offerings is good. Keeping precepts is
good. Practising meditation is good. Listening to Dhamma teachings is
good. May they become conditions for realizing Nibbāna.

But what is Nibbāna all about anyway? Nibbāna means not grasping.
Nibbāna means not giving meaning to things. Nibbāna means letting go.
Making offerings and doing meritorious deeds, observing moral precepts,
and meditating on loving-kindness: all these are for getting rid of
defilements and craving, for not wishing for anything, not wishing to
be, or become anything; for making the mind empty – empty of
self-cherishing, empty of concepts of self and other.

*Nibbāna paccayo hotu*: make it become a cause for Nibbāna. Practising
generosity is giving up, letting go. Listening to teachings is for the
purpose of gaining knowledge to give up and let go, to uproot clinging
to what is good and to what is bad. At first we meditate to become aware
of the wrong and the bad. When we recognize that, we give it up and we
practise what is good. Then, when some good is achieved, don’t get
attached to that good. Remain halfway in the good, or above the good –
don’t dwell under the good. If we are under the good, then the good
pushes us around, and we become slaves to it. We become slaves, and it
forces us to create all sorts of kamma and demerit. It can lead us into
anything, and the result will be the same kind of unhappiness and
unfortunate circumstances we found ourselves in before.

Give up evil and develop merit – give up the negative and develop what
is positive. Developing merit, remain above merit. Remain above merit
and demerit, above good and evil. Keep on practising with a mind that is
giving up, letting go and getting free. It’s the same no matter what you
are doing: if you do it with a mind of letting go it is a cause for
realizing Nibbāna. What you do free of desire, free of defilement, free
of craving, all merges with the path, meaning Noble Truth, meaning
*saccadhamma.* The Four Noble Truths are having the wisdom that knows
*taṇhā,* which is the source of *dukkha.* *Kāmataṇhā,* *bhavataṇhā,*
*vibhavataṇhā*: these are the origination, the source. If you are
wishing for anything or wanting to be anything, you are nourishing
*dukkha*, bringing *dukkha* into existence, because this is what gives
birth to *dukkha*. These are the causes. If we create the causes of
*dukkha*, then *dukkha* will come about. The cause is *vibhavataṇhā*:
this restless, anxious craving. One becomes a slave to desire and
creates all sorts of kamma and wrongdoing because of it, and thus
suffering is born. Simply speaking, *dukkha* is the child of desire.
Desire is the parent of *dukkha*. When there are parents, *dukkha* can
be born. When there are no parents, *dukkha* can not come about – there
will be no offspring.

This is where meditation should be focused. We should see all the forms
of *taṇhā*, which cause us to have desires. But talking about desire can
be confusing. Some people get the idea that any kind of desire, such as
desire for food and the material requisites for life, is *taṇhā*. But we
can have this kind of desire in an ordinary and natural way. When you’re
hungry and desire food, you can take a meal and be done with it. That’s
quite ordinary. This is desire that’s within boundaries and doesn’t have
ill effects. This kind of desire isn’t sensuality. If it’s sensuality,
then it becomes something more than desire. There will be craving for
more things to consume, seeking out flavours, seeking enjoyment in ways
that bring hardship and trouble, such as drinking liquor and beer.

Some tourists told me about a place where people eat live monkeys’
brains. They put a monkey in the middle of the table and cut open its
skull. Then they spoon out the brain to eat. That’s eating like demons
or hungry ghosts. It’s not eating in a natural or ordinary way. Doing
things like this, eating becomes *taṇhā*. They say that the blood of
monkeys makes them strong. So they try to get hold of such animals and
when they eat them they’re drinking liquor and beer too. This isn’t
ordinary eating. It’s the way of ghosts and demons mired in sensual
craving. It’s eating coals, eating fire, eating everything everywhere.
This sort of desire is what is *taṇhā*. There is no moderation.
Speaking, thinking, dressing, everything such people do goes to excess.
If our eating, sleeping, and other necessary activities are done in
moderation, there is no harm in them. So you should be aware of
yourselves in regard to these things; then they won’t become a source of
suffering. If we know how to be moderate and thrifty in our needs, we
can be comfortable.

Practising meditation and creating merit and virtue are not really such
difficult things to do, provided we understand them well. What is
wrongdoing? What is merit? Merit is what is good and beautiful, not
harming ourselves or others with our thinking, speaking, and acting. If
we do this, there is happiness. Nothing negative is being created. Merit
is like this. Skilfulness is like this.

It’s the same with making offerings and giving charity. When we give,
what is it that we are trying to give away? Giving is for the purpose of
destroying self-cherishing, the belief in a self along with selfishness.
Selfishness is powerful, extreme suffering. Selfish people always want
to be better than others and to get more than others. A simple example
is how, after they eat, they don’t want to wash their dishes. They let
someone else do it. If they eat in a group, they will leave it to the
group. After they eat, they take off. This is selfishness, not being
responsible, and it puts a burden on others. What it really amounts to
is someone who doesn’t care about himself, who doesn’t help himself and
who really doesn’t love himself. In practising generosity, we are trying
to cleanse our hearts of this attitude. This is called creating merit
through giving, in order to have a mind of compassion and caring towards
all living beings without exception.

If we can be free of just this one thing, selfishness, then we will be
like the Lord Buddha. He wasn’t out for himself, but sought the good of
all. If we have the path and fruit arising in our hearts like this we
can certainly progress. With this freedom from selfishness, all the
activities of virtuous deeds, generosity, and meditation will lead to
liberation. Whoever practises like this will become free and go beyond –
beyond all convention and appearance.

The basic principles of practice are not beyond our understanding. For
example, if we lack wisdom, when practising generosity, there won’t be
any merit. Without understanding, we think that generosity merely means
giving things. ‘When I feel like giving, I’ll give. If I feel like
stealing something, I’ll steal it. Then if I feel generous, I’ll give
something.’ It’s like having a barrel full of water. You scoop out a
bucketful, and then you pour back in a bucketful. Scoop it out again,
pour it in again, scoop it out and pour it in – like this. When will you
empty the barrel? Can you see an end to it? Can you see such practice
becoming a cause for realizing Nibbāna? Will the barrel become empty?
One scoop out, one scoop in – can you see when it will be finished?

Going back and forth like this is *vaṭṭa,* the cycle itself. If we’re
talking about really letting go, giving up good as well as evil, there’s
only scooping out. Even if there’s only a little bit, you scoop it out.
You don’t put in anything more, and you keep scooping out. Even if you
only have a small scoop to use, you do what you can and in this way the
time will come when the barrel is empty. If you’re scooping out a bucket
and pouring back a bucket, scooping out and then pouring back – well,
think about it. When will you see an empty barrel? This Dhamma isn’t
something distant. It’s right here in the barrel. You can do it at home.
Try it. Can you empty a water barrel like that? Do it all day tomorrow
and see what happens.

‘Giving up all evil, practising what is good, purifying the mind.’ We
give up wrongdoing first, and then start to develop the good. What is
the good and meritorious? Where is it? It’s like fish in the water. If
we scoop all the water out, we’ll get the fish – that’s a simple way to
put it. If we scoop out and pour back in, the fish remain in the barrel.
If we don’t remove all forms of wrongdoing, we won’t see merit and we
won’t see what is true and right. Scooping out and pouring back,
scooping out and pouring back, we only remain as we are. Going back and
forth like this, we only waste our time and whatever we do is
meaningless. Listening to teachings is meaningless. Making offerings is
meaningless. All our efforts to practise are in vain. We don’t
understand the principles of the Buddha’s way, so our actions don’t bear
the desired fruit.

When the Buddha taught about practice, he wasn’t only talking about
something for ordained people. He was talking about practising well,
practising correctly. *Supaṭipanno* means those who practise well.
*Ujupaṭipanno* means those who practise directly. *Ñāyapaṭipanno* means
those who practise for the realization of path, fruition and Nibbāna.
*Sāmīcipaṭipanno* are those who practise inclined towards truth. It
could be anyone. These are the Saṅgha of true disciples (*sāvaka*) of
the Lord Buddha. Laywomen living at home can be *sāvaka*. Laymen can be
*sāvaka*. Bringing these qualities to fulfilment is what makes one a
*sāvaka*. One can be a true disciple of the Buddha and realize
enlightenment.

Most of us in the Buddhist fold don’t have such complete understanding.
Our knowledge doesn’t go this far. We do our various activities thinking
that we will get some kind of merit from them. We think that listening
to teachings or making offerings is meritorious. That’s what we’re told.
But someone who gives offerings to ‘get’ merit is making bad kamma.

You can’t quite understand this. Someone who gives in order to get merit
has instantly accumulated bad kamma. If you give in order to let go and
free the mind, that brings you merit. If you do it to get something,
that’s bad kamma.

Listening to teachings to really understand the Buddha’s way is
difficult. The Dhamma becomes hard to understand when the practice that
people do – keeping precepts, sitting in meditation, giving – is for
getting something in return. We want merit, we want something. Well, if
something can be obtained, who gets it? We get it. When that is lost,
whose thing is it that’s lost? The person who doesn’t have something
doesn’t lose anything. And when it’s lost, who suffers over it?

Don’t you think that living your life to get things, brings you
suffering? Otherwise you can just go on as before trying to get
everything. And yet, if we make the mind empty, then we gain everything.
Higher realms, Nibbāna and all their accomplishments – we gain all of
it. In making offerings, we don’t have any attachment or aim; the mind
is empty and relaxed. We can let go and put down. It’s like carrying a
log and complaining it’s heavy. If someone tells you to put it down,
you’ll say, ‘If I put it down, I won’t have anything.’ Well, now you do
have something – you have heaviness. But you don’t have lightness. So do
you want lightness, or do you want to keep carrying? One person says to
put it down, the other says he’s afraid he won’t have anything. They’re
talking past each other.

We want happiness, we want ease, we want tranquillity and peace. It
means we want lightness. We carry the log, and then someone sees us
doing this and tells us to drop it. We say we can’t because what would
we have then? But the other person says that if we drop it, we can get
something better. The two have a hard time communicating.

If we make offerings and practise good deeds in order to get something,
it doesn’t work out. What we get is becoming and birth. It isn’t a cause
for realizing Nibbāna. Nibbāna is giving up and letting go. Trying to
get, to hold on, to give meaning to things, aren’t causes for realizing
Nibbāna. The Buddha wanted us to look here, at this empty place of
letting go. This is merit. This is skilfulness.

Once we have done practice – any sort of merit and virtue – we should
feel that our part is done. We shouldn’t carry it any further. We do it
for the purpose of giving up defilements and craving. We don’t do it for
the purpose of creating defilements, craving and attachment. Then where
will we go? We don’t go anywhere. Our practice is correct and true.

Most of us Buddhists, though we follow the forms of practice and
learning, have a hard time understanding this kind of talk. It’s because
*Māra,* meaning ignorance, meaning craving – the desire to get, to have,
and to be – enshrouds the mind. We only find temporary happiness. For
example, when we are filled with hatred towards someone it takes over
our minds and gives us no peace. We think about the person all the time,
thinking what we can do to strike out at him. The thinking never stops.
Then maybe one day we get a chance to go to his house and curse him and
tell him off. That gives us some release. Does that make an end of our
defilements? We found a way to let off steam and we feel better for it.
But we haven’t rid ourselves of the affliction of anger, have we? There
is some happiness in defilement and craving, but it’s like this. We’re
still storing the defilement inside and when the conditions are right,
it will flare up again even worse than before. Then we will want to find
some temporary release again. Do the defilements ever get finished in
this way?

It’s similar when someone’s spouse or children die, or when people
suffer big financial loss. They drink to relieve their sorrow. They go
to a movie to relieve their sorrow. Does it really relieve the sorrow?
The sorrow actually grows; but for the time being they can forget about
what happened so they call it a way to cure their misery. It’s like if
you have a cut on the bottom of your foot that makes walking painful.
Anything that contacts it hurts and so you limp along complaining of the
discomfort. But if you see a tiger coming your way, you’ll take off and
start running without any thought of your cut. Fear of the tiger is much
more powerful than the pain in your foot, so it’s as if the pain is
gone. The fear made it something small.

You might experience problems at work or at home that seem so big. Then
you get drunk and in that drunken state of more powerful delusion, those
problems no longer trouble you so much. You think it solved your
problems and relieved your unhappiness. But when you sober up the old
problems are back. So what happened to your solution? You keep
suppressing the problems with drink and they keep on coming back. You
might end up with cirrhosis of the liver, but you don’t get rid of the
problems; and then one day you are dead.

There is some comfort and happiness here; it’s the happiness of fools.
It’s the way that fools stop their suffering. There’s no wisdom here.
These different confused conditions are mixed in the heart that has a
feeling of well-being. If the mind is allowed to follow its moods and
tendencies, it feels some happiness. But this happiness is always
storing unhappiness within it. Each time it erupts our suffering and
despair will be worse. It’s like having a wound. If we treat it on the
surface but inside it’s still infected, it’s not cured. It looks okay
for a while, but when the infection spreads we have to start cutting. If
the inner infection is never cured we can be operating on the surface
again and again with no end in sight. What can be seen from the outside
may look fine for a while, but inside it’s the same as before.

The way of the world is like this. Worldly matters are never finished.
So the laws of the world in the various societies are constantly
resolving issues. New laws are always being established to deal with
different situations and problems. Something is dealt with for a while,
but there’s always a need for further laws and solutions. There’s never
the internal resolution, only surface improvement. The infection still
exists within, so there’s always need for more cutting. People are only
good on the surface, in their words and their appearance. Their words
are good and their faces look kind, but their minds aren’t so good.

When we get on a train and see some acquaintance there we say, ‘Oh, how
good to see you! I’ve been thinking about you a lot lately! I’ve been
planning to visit you!’ But it’s just talk. We don’t really mean it.
We’re being good on the surface, but we’re not so good inside. We say
the words, but then as soon as we’ve had a smoke and taken a cup of
coffee with him, we split. Then if we run into him one day in the
future, we’ll say the same things again: ‘Hey, good to see you! How have
you been? I’ve been meaning to go visit you, but I just haven’t had the
time.’ That’s the way it is. People are superficially good, but they’re
usually not so good inside.

The great teacher taught Dhamma and Vinaya. It is complete and
comprehensive. Nothing surpasses it and nothing in it need be changed or
adjusted, because it is the ultimate. It’s complete, so this is where we
can stop. There’s nothing to add or subtract, because it is something of
the nature not to be increased or decreased. It is just right. It is
true.

So we Buddhists come to hear Dhamma teachings and study to learn these
truths. If we know them, then our minds will enter the Dhamma; the
Dhamma will enter our minds. Whenever a person’s mind enters the Dhamma,
that person has well-being, that person has a mind at peace. The mind
then has a way to resolve difficulties, but has no way to degenerate.
When pain and illness afflict the body, the mind has many ways to
resolve the suffering. It can resolve it naturally, understanding this
as natural and not falling into depression or fear over it. Gaining
something, we don’t get lost in delight. Losing it, we don’t get
excessively upset, but rather we understand that the nature of all
things is that having appeared, they then decline and disappear. With
such an attitude we can make our way in the world. We are *lokavidū,*
knowing the world clearly. Then *samudaya,* the cause of suffering, is
not created, and *taṇhā* is not born. There is *vijjā*, knowledge of
things as they really are, and it illumines the world. It illumines
praise and blame. It illumines gain and loss. It illumines rank and
disrepute. It clearly illumines birth, ageing, illness, and death in the
mind of the practitioner.

That is someone who has reached the Dhamma. Such people no longer
struggle with life and are no longer constantly in search of solutions.
They resolve what can be resolved, acting as is appropriate. That is how
the Buddha taught: he taught those individuals who could be taught.
Those who could not be taught he discarded and let go of. Even had he
not discarded them, they were still discarding themselves – so he
dropped them. You might get the idea from this that the Buddha must have
been lacking in *mettā* to discard people. Hey! If you toss out a rotten
mango are you lacking in *mettā*? You can’t make any use of it, that’s
all. There was no way to get through to such people. The Buddha is
praised as one with supreme wisdom. He didn’t merely gather everyone and
everything together in a confused mess. He was possessed of the divine
eye and could clearly see all things as they really are. He was the
knower of the world.

As the knower of the world he saw danger in the round of saṃsāra. For us
who are his followers it’s the same. Knowing all things as they are will
bring us well-being. Where exactly are those things that cause us to
have happiness and suffering? Think about it well. They are only things
that we create ourselves. Whenever we create the idea that something is
us or ours, we suffer. Things can bring us harm or benefit, depending on
our understanding. So the Buddha taught us to pay attention to
ourselves, to our own actions and to the creations of our minds.
Whenever we have extreme love or aversion to anyone or anything,
whenever we are particularly anxious, that will lead us into great
suffering. This is important, so take a good look at it. Investigate
these feelings of strong love or aversion, and then take a step back. If
you get too close, they’ll bite. Do you hear this? If you grab at and
caress these things, they bite and they kick. When you feed grass to
your buffalo, you have to be careful. If you’re careful when it kicks
out, it won’t kick you. You have to feed it and take care of it, but you
should be smart enough to do that without getting bitten. Love for
children, relatives, wealth and possessions will bite. Do you understand
this? When you feed it, don’t get too close. When you give it water,
don’t get too close. Pull on the rope when you need to. This is the way
of Dhamma: recognizing impermanence, unsatisfactoriness and lack of
self, recognizing the danger and employing caution and restraint in a
mindful way.

Ajahn Tongrat didn’t teach a lot; he always told us, ‘Be really careful!
Be really careful!’ That’s how he taught. ‘Be really careful! If you’re
not really careful, you’ll catch it on the chin!’ This is really how it
is. Even if he didn’t say it, it’s still how it is. If you’re not really
careful, you’ll catch it on the chin. Please understand this. It’s not
someone else’s concern. The problem isn’t other people loving or hating
us. Others far away somewhere don’t make us create kamma and suffering.
It’s our possessions, our homes, our families where we have to pay
attention. Or what do you think? These days, where do you experience
suffering? Where are you involved in love, hate and fear? Control
yourselves, take care of yourselves. Watch out you don’t get bitten. If
they don’t bite they might kick. Don’t think that these things won’t
bite or kick. If you do get bitten, make sure it’s only a little bit.
Don’t get kicked and bitten to pieces. Don’t try to tell yourselves
there’s no danger. Possessions, wealth, fame, loved ones, all these can
kick and bite if you’re not mindful.

If you are mindful you’ll be at ease. Be cautious and restrained. When
the mind starts grasping at things and making a big deal out of them,
you have to stop it. It will argue with you, but you have to put your
foot down. Stay in the middle as the mind comes and goes. Put sensual
indulgence away on one side; put self-torment away on the other side.
Put love to one side, hate to the other side. Put happiness to one side,
suffering to the other side. Remain in the middle without letting the
mind go in either direction.

Like these bodies of ours – earth, water, fire and wind – where is the
person? There isn’t any person. These few different things are put
together and it’s called a person. That’s a falsehood. It’s not real;
it’s only real in the way of convention. When the time comes the
elements return to their old state. We’ve only come to stay with them
for a while so we have to let them return. The part that is earth, send
back to be earth. The part that is water, send back to be water. The
part that is fire, send back to be fire. The part that is wind, send
back to be wind. Or will you try to go with them and keep something? We
come to rely on them for a while; when it’s time for them to go, let
them go. When they come, let them come. All these phenomena, *sabhāva,*
appear and then disappear. That’s all. We understand that all these
things are flowing, constantly appearing and disappearing.

Making offerings, listening to teachings, practising meditation,
whatever we do should be done for the purpose of developing wisdom.
Developing wisdom is for the purpose of liberation, freedom from all
these conditions and phenomena. When we are free, then no matter what
our situation is, we don’t have to suffer. If we have children, we don’t
have to suffer. If we work, we don’t have to suffer. If we have a house,
we don’t have to suffer. It’s like a lotus in the water. ‘I grow in the
water, but I don’t suffer because of the water. I can’t be drowned or
burned, because I live in the water.’ When the water ebbs and flows it
doesn’t affect the lotus. The water and the lotus can exist together
without conflict. They are together yet separate. Whatever is in the
water nourishes the lotus and helps it grow into something beautiful.

It’s the same for us. Wealth, home, family, and all defilements of mind
no longer defile us but rather help us develop *pāramī*, the spiritual
perfections. In a grove of bamboo the old leaves pile up around the
trees and when the rain falls they decompose and become fertilizer.
Shoots grow and the trees develop, because of the fertilizer, and we
have a source of food and income. But it didn’t look like anything good
at all. So be careful – in the dry season, if you set fires in the
forest, they’ll burn up all the future fertilizer, and the fertilizer
will turn into fire that burns the bamboo. Then you won’t have any
bamboo shoots to eat. So if you burn the forest, you burn the bamboo
fertilizer. If you burn the fertilizer, you burn the trees and the grove
dies.

Do you understand? You and your families can live in happiness and
harmony with your homes and possessions, free of danger from floods or
fire. If a family is flooded or burned, it is only because of the people
in that family. It’s just like the bamboo’s fertilizer. The grove can be
burned because of it, or the grove can grow beautifully because of it.

Things will grow beautifully and then not beautifully and then become
beautiful again. Growing and degenerating, then growing again and
degenerating again – this is the way of worldly phenomena. If we know
growth and degeneration for what they are, we can find a conclusion to
them. Things grow and reach their limit. Things degenerate and reach
their limit. But we remain constant. It’s like when there was a fire in
Ubon city. People bemoaned the destruction and shed a lot of tears over
it. But things were rebuilt after the fire and the new buildings are
actually bigger and a lot better than what we had before, and people
enjoy the city more now.

This is how it is with the cycles of loss and development. Everything
has its limits. So the Buddha wanted us always to be contemplating.
While we still live we should think about death. Don’t consider it
something far away. If you’re poor, don’t try to harm or exploit others.
Face the situation and work hard to help yourself. If you’re well off,
don’t become forgetful in your wealth and comfort. It’s not very
difficult for everything to be lost. A rich person can become a pauper
in a couple of days. A pauper can become a rich person. It’s all owing
to the fact that these conditions are impermanent and unstable. Thus,
the Buddha said, ‘*pamādo maccuno padaṃ*’: heedlessness is the way to
death. The heedless are like the dead. Don’t be heedless! All beings and
all *saṅkhārā* are unstable and impermanent. Don’t form any attachment
to them! Happy or sad, progressing or falling apart, in the end it all
comes to the same place. Please understand this.

Living in the world and having this perspective, we can be free of
danger. Whatever we may gain or accomplish in the world because of our
good kamma, is still of the world and subject to decay and loss; so
don’t get too carried away by it. It’s like a beetle scratching at the
earth. It can scratch up a pile that’s a lot bigger than itself, but
it’s still only a pile of dirt. If it works hard it makes a deep hole in
the ground, but it’s still only a hole in dirt. If a buffalo drops a
load of dung there, it will be bigger than the beetle’s pile of earth,
but it still isn’t anything that reaches to the sky. It’s all dirt.
Worldly accomplishments are like this. No matter how hard the beetles
work, they’re just involved in dirt, making holes and piles.

People who have good worldly kamma have the intelligence to do well in
the world. But no matter how well they do they’re still living in the
world. All the things they do are worldly and have their limits, like
the beetle scratching away at the earth. The hole may go deep, but it’s
in the earth. The pile may get high, but it’s just a pile of dirt. Doing
well, getting a lot, we’re just doing well and getting a lot in the
world.

Please understand this and try to develop detachment. If you don’t gain
much, be contented, understanding that it’s only the worldly. If you
gain a lot, understand that it’s only the worldly. Contemplate these
truths and don’t be heedless. See both sides of things, not getting
stuck on one side. When something delights you, hold part of yourself
back in reserve, because that delight won’t last. When you are happy,
don’t go completely over to its side, because soon enough you’ll be back
on the other side with unhappiness.
