Knowing the World
=================

\<p class="chapter-footnote"\>*Note*: This talk has been published
elsewhere under the title: ‘*Seeking the Source*’\</p\>

\<span class="dropcaps-first"\>A\</span\>\<span
class="dropcaps-words"\>ll things just as they are\</span\> display the
truth. But we have biases and preferences about how we want them to be.
means knowing the world clearly. The world is these phenomena () abiding
as they are. To sum it up simply, the world is *arom*.[^1] That’s an
easy way to put it. The world is *arom*. If we say ‘world’, that’s
pretty vast. ‘*Arom* are the world’ is a lot simpler. The world is
*arom*. Being deluded by the world is being deluded by *arom*; being
deluded by *arom* is being deluded by the world. , knowing the world
clearly: however the world is, that’s what we should know. It exists
according to its conditions. So we should have full, present awareness
of it.

Similarly, we should know for what they are; develop wisdom that knows .
Whatever the truth of is, however they really are, that’s the truth we
should know. That’s called wisdom that accepts and knows without
obstacles.

We need to develop a mind that has tranquillity together with wisdom in
control of things. We talk about and about meditation and meditation.
But they are really all the same matter. They are the same, but we
divide them into different categories and get confused. I’ve often made
a simple analogy about it – there are things to compare it to – which
can make it easier to contemplate and understand.

A little mango later becomes a large, ripe mango. Is the little mango
the same piece of fruit as the large one? From the time it’s just a bud
flowering on the tree, it’s the same one mango. As it grows into a small
mango and then gets bigger and bigger, almost ripe, then finally ripe,
it’s only undergoing change.

The aspects of practice we talk about are the same. Sīla simply means
giving up wrongdoing. A person without *sīla* is in a hot condition.
Giving up wrongdoing and evil ways, brings coolness, preventing harm or
ill effects. The blessing that comes from this freedom from harmful
effects is a tranquil mind – that is samādhi. When the mind is in
samādhi, clean and pure, it will see many things. It’s like water that
is still and undisturbed. You can see your face in it. You can see
things further away reflected as well. You can see the roof of the
building over there. If a bird alights on the roof you can see it.

These factors are really all one, just like the one mango. The tiny
fruit is that same one mango. The growing fruit is the same mango. The
ripe fruit is the same mango. From green to yellow, it’s the same mango;
it’s undergoing change, and that’s why we see difference.

Having this kind of simple understanding can put us at ease. Doubts will
diminish. If instead we are relying on texts and seeking detailed
explanations, we are likely to end up in confusion. So we have to watch
our own minds. ‘ You should be watching over your minds. Those who watch
over their minds shall escape the snares of Both Māra and his snares.
And it depends on our own investigation.

My way of practice was a little strange. After I ordained and started to
practise, I had a lot of doubts and questions. But I didn’t like to ask
anyone about them very much. Even when I met Ajahn Mun, I didn’t ask him
many questions. I wanted to ask, but I didn’t. I sat and listened to his
teaching. I had questions, but I didn’t ask. Asking someone else is like
borrowing someone else’s knife to cut something. We never come to have
our own knife. That’s the way I felt. So I didn’t ask many questions of
others. If I stayed with a teacher for a year or two, I’d listen to his
discourses and try to work things out for myself. I would seek my own
answers. I was different from other disciples, but I was able to develop
wisdom; this way made me resourceful and clever. I didn’t become
heedless, rather I contemplated things until I could see for myself,
increasing my understanding and removing my doubts.

My advice is to not let yourself get wrapped up in doubts and questions.
Let them go and directly contemplate whatever you are experiencing.
Don’t make a big deal out of any physical pleasure or pain you
experience. When you sit in meditation and start to feel tired or
uncomfortable, adjust your position. Endure as much as you can, and then
move. Don’t overdo it. Develop a lot of mindfulness – that’s the point.
Do your walking and sitting meditation as much as you can; the aim is to
be developing mindfulness as much as you can, knowing things fully.
That’s enough.

Please take my words to contemplate. Whatever form of practice you’re
doing, when objects of mind arise, whether internally or externally,
those are called *arom*. The one who is aware of the *arom* is called …
well, whatever you want to call it is OK; you can call it ‘mind’. The
*arom* is one thing, and the the *arom* is another. It’s like the eye
and the objects it sees. The eye isn’t the objects, and the objects
aren’t the eye. The ear hears sounds, but the ear isn’t the sound and
the sound isn’t the ear. When there is contact between the two, then
things happen.

All states of mind, happy or unhappy, are called *arom*. Whatever they
may be, never mind – we should constantly be reminding ourselves that
‘this is uncertain’.

People don’t consider very much, that ‘this is uncertain’. Just this is
the vital factor that will bring about wisdom. It’s really important. In
order to cease our coming and going and come to rest, we only need to
say, ‘this is uncertain.’ Sometimes we may be distraught over something
to the point that tears are flowing; this is something not certain. When
moods of desire or aversion come to us, we should just remind ourselves
of this one thing. Whether standing, walking, sitting, or lying down,
whatever appears is uncertain. Can’t you do this? Keep it up no matter
what happens. Give it a try. You don’t need a lot – just this will work.
This is something that brings wisdom.

The way I practise meditation is not very complicated – just this. This
is what it all comes down to: ‘it’s uncertain.’ Everything meets at this
point. Don’t keep track of the various instances of mental experience.
When you sit, there may be various conditions of mind appearing, seeing
and knowing all manner of things, experiencing different states. Don’t
be keeping track of them[^2] and don’t get wrapped up in them. You only
need to remind yourself that they’re uncertain. That’s enough. That’s
easy to do. It’s simple. Then you can stop. Knowledge will come, but
then don’t make too much out of that or get attached to it.

Real investigation, investigation in the correct way, doesn’t involve
thinking. As soon as something contacts the eye, ear, nose, tongue, or
body, it immediately takes place of its own. You don’t have to pick up
anything to look at – things just present themselves and investigation
happens of its own. We talk about ‘initial thought’. It means raising
something up. is ‘discursive thought’. It’s investigation, seeing the
planes of existence () that appear.

In the final analysis, the way of the Buddha flourishes through
impermanence. It is always timely and relevant, whether in the time of
the Buddha, in other times past, in the present age, or in the future.
At all times, it is impermanence that rules. This is something you
should meditate on.

The true and correct words of the sages will not lack mention of
impermanence. This is the truth. If there is no mention of impermanence,
it is not the speech of the wise. It is not the speech of the Buddha or
the it’s called speech that does not accept the truth of existence.

=1 All things have need of a way of release. Contemplation is not a
matter of holding on and sticking to things. It’s a matter of releasing.
A mind that can’t release phenomena is in a state of intoxication. In
practice, it’s important not to be intoxicated. When practice really
seems to be good, don’t be intoxicated by that good. If you’re
intoxicated by it, it becomes something harmful, and your practice is no
longer correct. We do our best, but it’s important not to become drunk
on our efforts, otherwise we are out of harmony with Dhamma. This is the
Buddha’s advice. Even the good is not something to get intoxicated by.
Be aware of this when it happens.

A dam needs a sluiceway so that the water can run off. It’s the same for
us in practice. Using willpower to push ourselves and control the mind
is something we can do at times, but don’t get drunk on it. We want to
be teaching the mind, not merely controlling it, so that it becomes
aware. Too much forcing will make you crazy. What’s vital is to keep on
increasing awareness and sensitivity. Our path is like this. There are
many points for comparison. We could talk about construction work and
bring it back to the way of training the mind.

There is a lot of benefit to be had from practising meditation, from
watching over your mind. This is the first and foremost thing. The
teachings you can study in the scriptures and commentaries are true and
valuable, but they are secondary. They are people’s explanations of the
truth. But there is actual truth that surpasses the words. Sometimes the
expositions that are derived seem uneven or are not so accessible, and
with the passing of time they can become confusing. But the actual truth
they are based on remains the same and isn’t affected by what anyone
says or does. It is the original, natural state of things that does not
change or deteriorate. The explanations people compose are secondary or
tertiary, one or two steps removed, and though they can be good and
beneficial and flourish for some time, they are subject to
deterioration.[^3]

It’s like the way that as population keeps increasing, troubles increase
along with it. That’s quite natural. The more people there are, the more
issues there will be to deal with. Then leaders and teachers will try to
show us the right way to live, to do good and solve problems. That can
be valid and necessary, but it’s still not the same as the reality those
good ideas are based on. The true Dhamma that is the essence of all good
has no way to decline or deteriorate, because it is immutable. It is the
source, the existing as it is. All the followers of the Buddha’s way who
practise the Dhamma must strive to realize this. Then they may find
different means to illustrate it. Over time, the explanations lose their
potency, but the source remains the same.

So the Buddha taught to focus your attention and investigate.
Practitioners in search of the truth, do not be attached to your views
and knowledge. Don’t be attached to the knowledge of others. Don’t be
attached to anyone’s knowledge. Rather, develop special knowledge; allow
the to be revealed in full measure.

In training the mind, investigating the , our own minds are where it can
be seen. When there is doubt about anything, we should pay attention to
our thoughts and feelings, our mental processes. This is what we should
know. The rest is all superficial.

In practising Dhamma, we will meet with many sorts of experiences, such
as fear. What will we rely on then? When the mind is wrapped up in fear,
it can’t find anything to rely on. This is something I’ve gone through;
the deluded mind stuck in fear, unable to find a safe place anywhere. So
where can this be settled? It gets settled right at that place where it
appears. Wherever it arises, that is where it ceases. Wherever the mind
has fear, it can end fear right there. Putting it simply: when the mind
is completely full of fear, it has nowhere else to go, and it can stop
right there. The place of no fear is there in the place of fear.
Whatever states the mind undergoes, if it experiences visions, or
knowledge in meditation, for example, it doesn’t matter – we are taught
to focus awareness on this mind in the present. That is the standard.
Don’t chase after external phenomena. All the things we contemplate come
to conclusion at the source, the place where they arise. This is where
the causes are. This is important.

Feeling fear is a good example, since it’s easy to see; if we let
ourselves experience it until it has nowhere to go, then we will have no
more fear, because it will be exhausted. It loses its power, so we don’t
feel fear anymore. Not feeling fear means it has become empty. We accept
whatever comes our way, and it loses its power over us.

This is what the Buddha wanted us to place our trust in; he wanted us
not to be attached to our own views, not to be attached to others’
views. This is really important. We are aiming at the knowledge that
comes from realization of the truth, so we don’t want to get stuck in
attachment to our own or others’ views and opinions. But when we have
our ideas or interact with others, watching them contact the mind can be
illuminating. Knowledge can be born in those things that we have and
experience.

In watching the mind and cultivating meditation, there can be many
points of wrong understanding or deviation. Some people focus on
conditions of mind and want to analyse them excessively, so their minds
are always active. Or maybe we examine the five or we go into further
detail with the there are many such classifications that are taught for
contemplation. So we ponder and we analyse. Looking at the five doesn’t
seem to get us to any conclusion, so we might go into the thirty-two
parts, always analysing and investigating. But the way I see it, our
attitude towards these five , these heaps that we see right here, should
be one of weariness and disenchantment, because they don’t follow our
wishes. I think that’s probably enough. If they survive, we shouldn’t be
overly joyful to the point of forgetting ourselves. If they break up, we
shouldn’t be overly dejected by that. Recognizing this much should be
enough. We don’t have to tear apart the skin, the flesh, and the bones.

This is something I’ve often talked about. Some people have to analyse
like that, even if they are looking at a tree. Students in particular
want to know what merit and demerit are, what form they have, what they
look like. I explain to them that these things have no form. Merit is in
our having correct understanding, correct attitude. But they want to
know everything so clearly in such great detail.

So I’ve used the example of a tree. The students will look at a tree,
and they want to know all about the parts of the tree. Well, a tree has
roots, it has leaves. It lives because of the roots. The students have
to know, how many roots does it have? Major roots, minor roots,
branches, leaves, they want to know all the details and numbers. Then
they will feel they have clear knowledge about the tree. But the Buddha
said that a person who wants such knowledge is actually pretty stupid.
These things aren’t necessary to know. Just knowing that there are roots
and leaves is sufficient. Do you want to count all the leaves on a tree?
If you look at one leaf, you should be able to get the picture.

It’s the same with people. If we know ourselves, then we understand all
people in the universe without having to go and observe them. The Buddha
wanted us to look at ourselves. As we are, so are others. We are all all
being of the same characteristics. All are like this.

So we practise samādhi to be able to give up the defilements, to give
birth to knowledge and vision and let go of the five . Sometimes people
talk about samatha. Sometimes they talk about vipassanā. I feel this can
become confusing. Those who practise samādhi will praise samādhi. But,
it is just for making the mind tranquil so it can know those things we
have been talking about.

Then there are those who will say, ‘I don’t need to practise samādhi so
much. This plate will break one day in the future. Isn’t that good
enough? That will work, won’t it? I’m not very skilled in samādhi, but I
already know that the plate must break someday. Yes, I take good care of
it, because I’m afraid it will break, but I know that such is its
future, and when it does break, I won’t be suffering over that. Isn’t my
view correct? I don’t need to practise a lot of samādhi, because I
already have this understanding. You practise samādhi only for
developing this understanding. After training your mind through sitting,
you came to this view. I don’t sit much, but I am already confident that
this is the way of phenomena.’

This is a question for us practitioners. There are many factions of
teachers promoting their different methods of meditation. It can get
confusing. But the real point of it all is to be able to recognize the
truth, seeing things as they really are and being free of doubt.

As I see it, once we have correct knowledge, the mind comes under our
command. What is this command about? The command is in , knowing that
everything is impermanent. Everything stops here when we see clearly,
and it becomes the cause for us to let go. Then we let things be,
according to their nature. If nothing is occurring, we abide in
equanimity, and if something comes up, we contemplate: does it cause us
to have suffering? Do we hold onto it with grasping attachment? Is there
anything there? This is what supports and sustains our practice. If we
practise and get to this point, I think every one of us will realize
genuine peace.

Whether we are undertaking vipassanā meditation or samatha meditation,
just this is what it’s really about. But these days, it seems to me that
when Buddhists talk about these things according to the traditional
explanations, it becomes vague and mixed up. But the truth () isn’t
vague or mixed up. It remains as it is.

So I feel it’s better to seek out the source, looking at the way things
originate in the mind. There’s not a lot to this.

Birth, ageing, illness, and death: it’s brief, but it’s a universal
truth. So see it clearly and acknowledge these facts. If you acknowledge
them, you will be able to let go. Gain, rank, praise, happiness, and
their opposites – you can let them go, because you recognize them for
what they are.

If we reach this place of ‘recognizing truth’, we will be uncomplicated,
undemanding people, content with simple food, dwelling, and other
requisites for life, easy to speak to and unassuming in our actions.
Without difficulty or trouble, we will live at ease. One who meditates
and realizes a tranquil mind will be like this.

At present we are trying to practise in the way of the Buddha and his
disciples. Those beings had achieved awakening, yet they still
maintained their practice as long as they were living. They acted for
the benefit of themselves and for the benefit of others, yet even after
they had accomplished all that they could, they still kept up their
practice, seeking their own and others’ well-being in various ways. I
think we should take them as the model for our practice. It means not
becoming complacent – that was their deeply ingrained nature. They never
slackened their efforts. Effort was their way, their natural habit. Such
is the character of the sages, of genuine practitioners.

We can compare it to rich people and poor people. The rich are
especially hard-working, much more so than the poor. And the less effort
poor people make, the less chance they have of becoming rich. The rich
have knowledge and experience of a lot of things, so they maintain the
habit of diligence in all they do.

If we want to take a break or get some rest, we will find rest in the
practice itself. Once we’ve practised to get to the goal, know the goal,
and be the goal, then when we are active, there’s no way to incur loss
or be harmed. When we are sitting still, there is no way we can be
harmed. In all situations, nothing can affect us. Practice has matured
to fulfilment and we have reached the destination. Maybe today we don’t
have a chance to sit and practise samādhi, but we are OK. Samādhi
doesn’t mean only sitting. There can be samādhi in all postures. If we
are really practising in all postures, we will enjoy samādhi thus. There
won’t be anything that can interfere. Such words as ‘I’m not in a clear
state of mind now, so I can’t practise’ will not be heard. We won’t have
such ideas; we will never feel that way. Our practice is well developed
and complete – this is how it should be. When we are free of doubt and
perplexity, we stop at this point and contemplate.

You can look into this: self-view, sceptical doubt, superstitious
attachment to rites and rituals. The first step is to get free of these.
The mind needs to get free of whatever sort of knowledge you gain. What
are they like now? To what extent do we still have them? We are the only
ones who can know this; we have to know for ourselves. Who else can know
better than we? If we are stuck in attachment to self-view, doubt,
superstition here, have doubt here, are still groping here, then there
is the conception of self here. But now we can only think, if there is
no self, then who is it that takes interest and practises?

All these things go together. If we come to know them through practice
and make an end of them, we live in an ordinary way. Just like the
Buddha and the ariyas. They lived just like worldly beings (). They used
the same language as worldly beings. Their everyday existence wasn’t
really different. They used many of the same conventions. Where they
differed was that they didn’t create suffering for themselves with their
minds. They had no suffering. This is the crucial point; they went
beyond suffering, extinguishing suffering. means ‘extinguishing’.
Extinguishing suffering, extinguishing heat and torment, extinguishing
doubt and anxiety.

There’s no need to be in doubt about the practice. Whenever there is
doubt about something, don’t have doubt about the doubt – look directly
at it and crush it like that.

In the beginning, we train to pacify the mind. This can be difficult to
do. You have to find a meditation that suits your own temperament. That
will make it easier to gain tranquillity. But in truth, the Buddha
wanted us to return to ourselves, to take responsibility and look at
ourselves.

Anger is hot. Pleasure, the extreme of indulgence is too cool. The
extreme of self-torment is hot. We want neither hot nor cold. Know hot
and cold. Know all things that appear. Do they cause us to suffer? Do we
form attachment to them? The teaching that birth is suffering doesn’t
only mean dying from this life and taking rebirth in the next life.
That’s so far away. The suffering of birth happens right now. It’s said
that becoming is the cause of birth. What is this ‘becoming’? Anything
that we attach to and put meaning on is becoming. Whenever we see
anything as self or other or belonging to ourselves, without wise
discernment to know it as only a convention, that is all becoming.
Whenever we hold on to something as ‘us’ or ‘ours’, and it then
undergoes change, the mind is shaken by that. It is shaken with a
positive or negative reaction. That sense of self experiencing happiness
or unhappiness is birth. When there is birth, it brings suffering along
with it. Ageing is suffering, illness is suffering, death is suffering.

Right now, do we have becoming? Are we aware of this becoming? For
example, take the trees in the monastery. The abbot of the monastery can
take birth as a worm in every tree in the monastery if he isn’t aware of
himself, if he feels that it is really ‘his’ monastery. This grasping at
‘my’ monastery with ‘my’ orchard and ‘my’ trees is the worm that latches
on there. If there are thousands of trees, he will become a worm
thousands of times. This is becoming. When the trees are cut or meet
with any harm, the worms are affected; the mind is shaken and takes
birth with all this anxiety. Then there is the suffering of birth, the
suffering of ageing, and so forth. Are you aware of the way this
happens?

Well, those objects in our homes or our orchards are still a little far
away. Let’s look right at ourselves sitting here. We are composed of the
five aggregates and the four elements. These are designated as a self.
Do you see these and these suppositions as they really are? If you don’t
see the truth of them, there is becoming, being gladdened or depressed
over the five , and we take birth, with all the resultant sufferings.
This rebirth happens right now, in the present. This glass isn’t broken
now, and we are happy about it now. But if this glass breaks right now,
we are upset right now. This is how it happens, being upset or being
happy without any wisdom in control. One only meets with ruination. You
don’t need to look far away to understand this. When you focus your
attention here, you can know whether or not there is becoming. Then,
when it is happening, are you aware of it? Are you aware of convention
and supposition? Do you understand them? It’s the grasping attachment
that is the vital point, whether or not we are really believing in the
designations of me and mine. This grasping is the worm, and it is what
causes birth.

Where is this attachment? Grasping onto form, feeling, perception,
thoughts, and consciousness, we attach to happiness and unhappiness, and
we become obscured and take birth. It happens when we have contact
through the senses. The eyes see forms, and it happens in the present.
This is what the Buddha wanted us to look at, to recognize becoming and
birth as they occur through our senses. If we know the inner senses and
the external objects, we can let go, internally and externally. This can
be seen in the present. It’s not something that happens when we die from
this life. It’s the eye seeing forms right now, the ear hearing sounds
right now, the nose smelling aromas right now, the tongue tasting
flavours right now. Are you taking birth with them? Be aware and
recognize birth right as it happens. This way is better.

To do this requires having wisdom to steadily apply mindfulness and
clear comprehension. Then you can be aware of yourself and know when you
are undergoing becoming and birth. You won’t need to ask a
fortune-teller.

I have a Dhamma friend in central Thailand. In the old days we practised
together, but we went our separate ways long ago. Recently I saw him. He
practises the reciting the and giving discourses on it. But he hadn’t
resolved his doubts yet. He prostrated to me and said, ‘Oh, Ajahn, I’m
so happy to see you!’ I asked him why. He told me he had gone to some
shrine where people go for divinations. He held the Buddha statue and
said, ‘If I have already attained the state of purity, may I be able to
raise up this statue. If I have not yet attained the state of purity,
may I not be able to raise it up.’ And then he was able to raise it up,
which made him very delighted. Just this little act, which has no real
basis in anything, meant so much to him and made him think he was pure.
So he had it engraved on a stone to say, ‘I raised up the Buddha statue
and have thus attained the state of purity.’

Practitioners of the Dhamma shouldn’t be like that. He didn’t see
himself at all. He was only looking outside and seeing external objects
made of stone and cement. He didn’t see the intentions and movements in
his own mind in the present moment. When our meditation is looking
there, we won’t have doubts. So the way I see it, our practice may be
good, but there’s no one who can vouch for us. Like this chapel we are
sitting in. It was built by someone with a fourth-grade education. He
did a great job, but he has no brand name. He can’t provide the
guarantee or vouch for himself, showing qualifications like an architect
who has the full training and education, but still he does it well. The
is like this. Even though we haven’t studied much and don’t know the
detailed explanations, we can recognize suffering, we can recognize what
brings suffering, and we can let go of it. We don’t need to investigate
the explanations or anything else. We just look at our minds, look at
these matters.

Don’t make your practice confusing. Don’t create a bunch of doubts for
yourself. When you do have doubt, control it by seeing it as merely what
it is, and let go. Really, there is nothing. We create the sense that
there is something, but really there’s nothing – there is Our doubtful
minds think there is something, and then there’s Then meditation becomes
difficult because we think we have to get something and become
something. Are you going to practise meditation to get or be something?
Is that the correct way? It’s only that gets involved in having and
becoming. There’s no end in sight if you practise like that.

Here, we are talking about cessation, extinguishing. We are talking
about everything extinguished, ceasing because of knowledge, not in a
state of indifferent ignorance. If we can practise like this and vouch
for our own experience, then never mind what anyone else says.

=1 So please don’t get lost in doubts about the practice. Don’t get
attached to your own views. Don’t get attached to others’ views. Staying
in this middle place, wisdom can be born, correctly and to full measure.
I’ve often made the simple analogy of comparing grasping to the place we
live. For example, there is the roof and the floor, the upper and lower
storeys. If someone goes upstairs, he knows he is up there. If he comes
downstairs, he knows he is downstairs, standing on the floor. This is
all we can recognize.

We can sense where we are, either upstairs or downstairs. But the space
in the middle we aren’t aware of, because there’s no way to identify or
measure it – it’s just space. We don’t comprehend the space in between.
But it remains as it is, whether or not anyone descends from upstairs or
not. The is like that, not going anywhere, not changing. When we say ‘no
becoming’, that is the middle space, not marked or identified by
anything. It can’t be described.

For example, these days, the youngsters who are interested in Dhamma
want to know about Nibbāna. What’s it like? But if we tell them about a
place without becoming, they don’t want to go. They back off. We tell
them that this place is cessation, it is peace, but they want to know
how they will live, what they will eat and enjoy there. So there’s no
end to it. The real questions for those who want to know the truth, are
questions about how to practise.

There was an who met the Buddha. He asked, ‘Who is your teacher?’ The
Buddha replied, ‘I was enlightened through my own efforts. I have no
teacher.’ But his reply was incomprehensible to that wanderer. It was
too direct. Their minds were in different places. Even if the wanderer
asked all day and all night, there was nothing about it he could
understand. The enlightened mind is unmoving and thus can not be
recognized. We can develop wisdom and remove our doubts only through
practice, nothing else.

So should we not listen to the Dhamma? We should, but then we should put
the knowledge we gain into practice. But this doesn’t mean that we’re
following a person who teaches us; we follow the experience and
awareness that arise as we put the teaching into practice. For instance,
we feel, ‘I really like this thing. I like doing things this way!’ But
the Dhamma doesn’t allow such liking and attachment. If we are really
committed to the Dhamma, then we let go of that object of attraction
when we see that it is contrary to Dhamma. This is what the knowledge is
for.

A lot of talk – you’re probably tired by now. Do you have any questions?
Well, you probably do; you should have awareness in letting go. Things
flow by and you let them go, but not in a dull, indifferent manner,
without seeing what is happening. There has to be mindfulness. All the
things I’ve been saying are pointing to having mindfulness protecting
you at all times. It means practising with wisdom, not with delusion.
Then we will gain true knowledge as wisdom becomes bold and keeps
increasing.

[^1]: *Arom*: (*Thai*) All states (or objects) of mind, whether happy or
    unhappy, internal or external.

[^2]: literally ‘count’

[^3]: Because they are still in the realm of concepts.
