The Dhamma Goes Westward
========================

*Question*: A friend of mine went to practise with a Zen teacher. He
asked him, ‘When the Buddha was sitting beneath the Bodhi tree, what was
he doing?’ The Zen master answered, ‘He was practising zazen!’ My friend
said, ‘I don’t believe it.’ The Zen master asked him, ‘What do you mean,
you don’t believe it?’ My friend said, ‘I asked Goenka the same question
and he said, “When the Buddha was sitting under the Bodhi tree, he was
practising vipassanā!” So everybody says the Buddha was doing whatever
they do.’

*Answer*: When the Buddha sat out in the open, he was sitting beneath
the Bodhi tree. Isn’t that so? When he sat under some other kind of
tree, he was sitting beneath the Bodhi tree. There’s nothing wrong with
those explanations. ‘Bodhi’ means the Buddha himself, the one who knows.
It’s OK to talk about sitting beneath the Bodhi tree, but lots of birds
sit beneath the Bodhi tree. Lots of people sit beneath the Bodhi tree.
But they are far from such knowledge, far from such truth. Yes, we can
say, ‘beneath the Bodhi tree’. Monkeys play in the Bodhi tree. People
sit there beneath the Bodhi tree. But this doesn’t mean they have any
profound understanding. Those who have deeper understanding realize that
the true meaning of the ‘Bodhi tree’ is the absolute Dhamma.

So in this way it’s certainly good for us to try to sit beneath the
Bodhi tree. Then we can be Buddha. But we don’t need to argue with
others over this question. When one person says the Buddha was doing one
kind of practice beneath the Bodhi tree and another person disputes
that, we needn’t get involved. We should be looking at it from the
viewpoint of the ultimate, meaning realizing the truth. There is also
the conventional idea of ‘Bodhi tree’, which is what most people talk
about; but when there are two kinds of Bodhi tree, people can end up
arguing and having the most contentious disputes – and then there is no
Bodhi tree at all.

It’s talking about *paramatthadhamma,* the level of ultimate truth. So
in that case, we can also try to get underneath the Bodhi tree. That’s
pretty good – then we’ll be Buddha. It’s not something to be arguing
over. When someone says the Buddha was practising a certain kind of
meditation beneath the Bodhi tree and someone else says, ‘No, that’s not
right,’ we needn’t get involved. We’re aiming at *paramatthadhamma*,
meaning dwelling in full awareness. This ultimate truth pervades
everything. Whether the Buddha was sitting beneath the Bodhi tree or
performing other activities in other postures, never mind. That’s just
the intellectual analysis people have developed. One person has one view
of the matter, another person has another idea; we don’t have to get
involved in disputes over it.

Where did the Buddha enter Nibbāna means extinguished without remainder,
finished. Being finished comes from knowledge, knowledge of the way
things really are. That’s how things get finished, and that is the
*paramatthadhamma*. There are explanations according to the levels of
convention and liberation. They are both true, but their truths are
different. For example, we say that you are a person. But the Buddha
will say, ‘That’s not so. There’s no such thing as a person.’ So we have
to summarize the various ways of speaking and explanation into
convention and liberation.

We can explain it like this: previously you were a child. Now you are
grown up. Are you a new person or the same person as before? If you are
the same as the old person, how did you become an adult? If you are a
new person, where did you come from? But talking about an old person and
a new person doesn’t really get to the point. This question illustrates
the limitations of conventional language and understanding. If there is
something called ‘big’, then there is ‘small’. If there is small there
is big. We can talk about small and large, young and old, but there are
really no such things in any absolute sense. You can’t really say
somebody or something is big. The wise do not accept such designations
as real, but when ordinary people hear about this, that ‘big’ is not
really true and ‘small’ is not really true, they are confused because
they are attached to concepts of big and small.

You plant a sapling and watch it grow. After a year it is one meter
high. After another year it is two meters tall. Is it the same tree or a
different tree? If it’s the same tree, how did it become bigger? If it’s
a different tree, how did it grow from the small tree? From the
viewpoint of someone who is enlightened to the Dhamma and sees
correctly, there is no new or old tree, no big or small tree. One person
looks at a tree and thinks it is tall. Another person will say it’s not
tall. But there is no ‘tall’ that really exists independently. You can’t
say someone is big and someone is small, someone is grown up and someone
else is young. Things end here and problems are finished with. If we
don’t get tied up in knots over these conventional distinctions, we
won’t have doubts about practice.

I’ve heard of people who worship their deities by sacrificing animals.
They kill ducks, chickens and cows and offer them to their gods,
thinking that will be pleasing to them. This is wrong understanding.
They think they are making merits, but it’s the exact opposite: they are
actually making a lot of bad kamma. Someone who really looks into this
won’t think like that. But have you noticed? I’m afraid people in
Thailand are becoming like that. They’re not applying real
investigation.

*Q*: Is that *vīmaṃsā*?

*A*: It means understanding cause and result.

*Q*: Then the teachings talk about *chanda,* aspiration; *viriya,*
exertion; and *citta,* mind; together with *vimamsā* these are the four
*iddhipādā,* ‘bases for accomplishment’.

*A*: When there’s satisfaction, is it with something that is correct? Is
exertion correct? *Vīmaṃsā* has to be present with these other factors.

*Q*: Are *citta* and *vīmaṃsā* different?

*A*: *Vīmaṃsā* is investigation. It means skilfulness or wisdom. It is a
factor of the mind. You can say that *chanda* is mind, *viriya* is mind,
*citta* is mind, *vīmaṃsā* is mind. They are all aspects of mind, they
all can be summarized as ‘mind’, but here they are distinguished for the
purpose of pointing out these different factors of the mind. If there is
satisfaction, we may not know if it is right or wrong. If there is
exertion, we don’t know if it’s right or wrong. Is what we call mind the
real mind? There has to be *vīmaṃsā* to discern these things. When we
investigate the other factors with wise discernment, our practice
gradually comes to be correct and we can understand the Dhamma.

But Dhamma doesn’t bring much benefit if we don’t practise meditation.
We won’t really know what it is all about. These factors are always
present in the mind of real practitioners. Then even if they go astray,
they will be aware of that and be able to correct it. So their path of
practice is continuous.

People may look at you and feel your way of life, your interest in
Dhamma, makes no sense. Others may say that if you want to practise
Dhamma, you ought to be ordained as a monk. Being ordained is not really
the crucial point. It’s how you practise. As it’s said, one should be
one’s own witness. Don’t take others as your witness. It means learning
to trust yourself. Then there is no loss. People may think you are
crazy, but never mind. They don’t know anything about Dhamma.

Others’ words can’t measure your practice. And you don’t realize the
Dhamma because of what others say. I mean the real Dhamma. The teachings
others can give you are to show you the path, but that isn’t real
knowledge. When people meet the Dhamma, they realize it specifically
within themselves. So the Buddha said, ‘The *Tathāgata* is merely one
who shows the way.’ When someone is ordained, I tell them, ‘Our
responsibility is only this part: the reciting *ācariya* have done their
chanting. I have given you the Going Forth and vows of ordination. Now
our job is done. The rest is up to you, to do the practice correctly.’

Teachings can be most profound, but those who listen may not understand.
But never mind. Don’t be perplexed over profundity or lack of it. Just
do the practice wholeheartedly and you can arrive at real understanding;
it will bring you to the same place the teachings are talking about.
Don’t rely on the perceptions of ordinary people. Have you read the
story about the blind men and the elephant? It’s a good illustration.

Suppose there’s an elephant and a bunch of blind people are trying to
describe it. One touches the leg and says it’s like a pillar. Another
touches the ear and says it’s like a fan. Another touches the tail and
says, ‘No, it’s not a fan; it’s like a broom.’ Another touches the
shoulder and says it’s something else again from what the others say.

It’s like this. There’s no resolution, no end. Each blind person touches
part of the elephant and has a completely different idea of what it is.
But it’s the same one elephant. It’s like this in practice. With a
little understanding or experience, you get limited ideas. You can go
from one teacher to the next seeking explanations and instructions,
trying to figure out if they are teaching correctly or incorrectly and
how their teachings compare to each other. Some monks are always
travelling around with their bowls and umbrellas learning from different
teachers. They try to judge and measure, so when they sit down to
meditate they are constantly in confusion about what is right and what
is wrong. ‘This teacher said this, but that teacher said that. One guy
teaches in this way, but the other guy’s methods are different. They
don’t seem to agree.’ It can lead to a lot of doubt.

You might hear that certain teachers are really good and so you go to
receive teachings from Thai Ajahns, Zen masters and others. It seems to
me you’ve probably had enough teaching, but the tendency is to always
want to hear more, to compare and to end up in doubt as a result. Then
each successive teacher increases your confusion further. There’s a
story of a wanderer in the Buddha’s time that was in this kind of
situation. He went to one teacher after the next, hearing their
different explanations and learning their methods. He was trying to
learn meditation but was only increasing his perplexity. His travels
finally brought him to the teacher Gotama, and he described his
predicament to the Buddha.

‘Doing as you have been doing will not bring an end to doubt and
confusion,’ the Buddha told him. ‘At this time, let go of the past;
whatever you may or may not have done, whether it was right or wrong,
let go of that now.

The future has not yet come. Do not speculate over it at all, wondering
how things may turn out. Let go of all such disturbing ideas – it is
merely thinking.

‘Letting go of past and future, look at the present. Then you will know
the Dhamma. You may know the words spoken by various teachers, but you
still do not know your own mind. The present moment is empty; look only
at arising and ceasing of *saṅkhārā.* See that they are impermanent,
unsatisfactory and empty of self. See that they really are thus. Then
you will not be concerned with the past or the future. You will clearly
understand that the past is gone and the future has not yet arrived.
Contemplating in the present, you will realize that the present is the
result of the past. The results of past actions are seen in the present.

‘The future has not yet come. Whatever does occur in the future will
arise and pass away in the future; there is no point in worrying over it
now, as it has not yet occurred. So contemplate in the present. The
present is the cause of the future. If you want a good future, create
good in the present, increasing your awareness of what you do in the
present. The future is the result of that. The past is the cause and the
future is the result of the present.

‘Knowing the present, one knows the past and the future. Then one lets
go of the past and the future, knowing they are gathered in the present
moment.’

Understanding this, that wanderer made up his mind to practise as the
Buddha advised, putting things down. Seeing ever more clearly, he
realized many kinds of knowledge, seeing the natural order of things
with his own wisdom. His doubts ended. He put down the past and the
future and everything appeared in the present. This was *eko dhammo*,
the one Dhamma. Then it was no longer necessary for him to carry his
begging bowl up mountains and into forests in search of understanding.
If he did go somewhere, he went in a natural way, not out of desire for
something. If he stayed put, he was staying in a natural way, not out of
desire.

Practising in that way, he became free of doubt. There was nothing to
add to his practice, nothing to remove. He dwelt in peace, without
anxiety over past or future. This was the way the Buddha taught.

But it’s not just a story about something that happened long ago. If we
at this time practise correctly, we can also gain realization. We can
know the past and the future because they are gathered at this one
point, the present moment. If we look to the past we won’t know. If we
look to the future we won’t know, because that is not where the truth
is; it exists here, in the present.

Thus the Buddha said, ‘I am enlightened through my own efforts, without
any teacher.’ Have you read this story? A wanderer of another sect asked
him, ‘Who is your teacher?’ The Buddha answered, ‘I have no teacher. I
attained enlightenment by myself.’ But that wanderer just shook his head
and went away. He thought the Buddha was making up a story and so he had
no interest in what he said. He thought it was not possible to achieve
anything without a teacher and guide.

It’s like this: you study with a spiritual teacher and he tells you to
give up greed and anger. He tells you they are harmful and that you need
to get rid of them. Then you may practise and do that. But getting rid
of greed and anger didn’t come about just because he taught you; you had
to actually practise and do that. Through practice you came to realize
something for yourself. You see greed in your mind and give it up. You
see anger in your mind and give it up. The teacher doesn’t get rid of
them for you. He tells you about getting rid of them, but it doesn’t
happen just because he tells you. You do the practice and come to
realization. You understand these things for yourself.

It’s like the Buddha is catching hold of you and bringing you to the
beginning of the path, and he tells you, ‘Here is the path – walk on
it.’ He doesn’t help you walk. You do that yourself. When you do travel
the path and practise Dhamma, you meet the real Dhamma, which is beyond
anything that anyone can explain to you. So one is enlightened by
oneself, understanding past, future and present, understanding cause and
result. Then doubt is finished.

We talk about giving up and developing, renouncing and cultivating. But
when the fruit of practice is realized, there is nothing to add and
nothing to remove. The Buddha taught that this is the point we want to
arrive at, but people don’t want to stop there. Their doubts and
attachments keep them on the move, keep them confused and keep them from
stopping there. So when one person has arrived but others are somewhere
else, they won’t be able to make any sense of what he may say about it.
They might have some intellectual understanding of the words, but this
is not real understanding or knowledge of the truth.

Usually when we talk about practice we talk about entering and leaving,
increasing the positive and removing the negative. But the final result
is that all of these are done with. There is the *sekha puggala,* the
person who needs to train in these things, and there is the *asekha
puggala,* the person who no longer needs to train in anything. This is
talking about the mind; when the mind has reached this level of full
realization, there is nothing more to practise. Why is this? It is
because such a person doesn’t have to make use of any of the conventions
of teaching and practice. This person has abandoned the defilements.

The *sekha* person has to train in the steps of the path, from the very
beginning to the highest level. When they have completed this they are
called *asekha*, meaning they no longer need to train because everything
is finished. The things to be trained in are finished. Doubts are
finished. There are no qualities to be developed. There are no
defilements to remove. Such people dwell in peace. Whatever good or evil
there is will not affect them; they are unshakeable no matter what they
meet. This is talking about the empty mind. Now you will really be
confused.

You don’t understand this at all. ‘If my mind is empty, how can I walk?’
Precisely because the mind is empty. ‘If the mind is empty, how can I
eat? Will I have desire to eat if my mind is empty?’ There’s not much
benefit in talking about emptiness like this when people haven’t trained
properly. They won’t be able to understand it.

Those who use such terms have sought ways to give us some feeling that
can lead us to understand the truth. For example, the Buddha said that
in truth these *saṅkhārā* that we have been accumulating and carrying
from the time of our birth until this moment are not ourselves and do
not belong to us. Why did he say such a thing? There’s no other way to
formulate the truth. He spoke in this way for people who have
discernment, so that they could gain wisdom. But this is something to
contemplate carefully.

Some people will hear the words, ‘Nothing is mine’, and they will get
the idea they should throw away all their possessions. With only
superficial understanding, people will get into arguments about what
this means and how to apply it. ‘This is not my self’, doesn’t mean you
should end your life or throw away your possessions. It means you should
give up attachment. There is the level of conventional reality and the
level of ultimate reality – supposition and liberation. On the level of
convention, there is Mr. A, Mrs. B, Mr. L, Mrs. N, and so on. We use
these suppositions for convenience in communicating and functioning in
the world. The Buddha did not teach that we shouldn’t use these things,
but rather that we shouldn’t be attached to them. We should realize that
they are empty.

It’s hard to talk about this. We must depend on practice and gain
understanding through practice. If you try to get knowledge and
understanding by studying and asking others you won’t really understand
the truth. It’s something you have to see and know for yourself through
practising. Turn inwards to know within yourself. Don’t always be
turning outwards. But when we talk about practising people become
argumentative. Their minds are ready to argue, because they have learned
this or that approach to practice and have one-sided attachment to what
they have learned. They haven’t realized the truth through practice.

Did you notice the Thai people we met the other day? They asked
irrelevant questions like, ‘Why do you eat out of your almsbowl?’ I
could see that they were far from Dhamma. They’ve had modern education
so I can’t tell them much. But I let the American monk talk to them.
They might be willing to listen to him. Thai people these days don’t
have much interest in Dhamma and don’t understand it. Why do I say that?
If someone hasn’t studied something, they are ignorant of it. They’ve
studied other things, but they are ignorant of Dhamma. I’ll admit that
I’m ignorant of the things they have learned. The Western monk has
studied Dhamma, so he can tell them something about it.

Among Thai people in the present time there is less and less interest in
being ordained, studying and practising. I don’t know if it’s because
they are busy with work, because the country is developing materially,
or what the reason might be. In the past when someone was ordained they
would stay for at least a few years, four or five Rains. Now it’s a week
or two. Some are ordained in the morning and disrobe in the evening.
That’s the direction it’s going in now. One fellow told me, ‘If everyone
were to be ordained the way you prefer, for a few Rains at least, there
would be no progress in the world. Families wouldn’t grow. Nobody would
be building things.’

I said to him, ‘Your thinking is the thinking of an earthworm. An
earthworm lives in the ground. It eats earth for its food. Eating and
eating, it starts to worry that it will run out of dirt to eat. It is
surrounded by dirt, the whole earth is covering its head, but it worries
it will run out of dirt.’

That’s the thinking of an earthworm. People worry that the world won’t
progress, that it will come to an end. That’s an earthworm’s view. They
aren’t earthworms, but they think like them. That’s the wrong
understanding of the animal realm. They are really ignorant.

There’s a story I’ve often told about a tortoise and a snake. The forest
was on fire and they were trying to flee. The tortoise was lumbering
along, and then it saw the snake slither by. It felt pity for that
snake. Why? The snake had no legs, so the tortoise figured it wouldn’t
be able to escape the fire. It wanted to help the snake. But as the fire
kept spreading the snake fled easily, while the tortoise couldn’t make
it, even with its four legs, and it died there.

That was the tortoise’s ignorance. It thought, if you have legs you can
move. If you don’t have legs, you can’t go anywhere. So it was worried
about the snake. It thought the snake would die because it didn’t have
legs. But the snake wasn’t worried; it knew it could easily escape the
danger.

This is one way to talk to people who have confused ideas. They feel
pity for you if you aren’t like them and don’t have their views and
their knowledge. So who is ignorant? I’m ignorant in my own way; there
are things I don’t know about, so I’m ignorant on that account.

Meeting different situations can be a cause for tranquillity. But I
didn’t understand how foolish and mistaken I was. Whenever something
disturbed my mind, I tried to get away from it, to escape. What I was
doing was escaping from peace. I was continually running away from
peace. I didn’t want to see this or know about that; I didn’t want to
think about or experience various things. I didn’t realize that this was
defilement. I only thought that I needed to remove myself and get far
away from people and situations, so that I wouldn’t meet anything
disturbing or hear speech that was displeasing. The farther away I could
get, the better.

After many years had passed, I was forced by the natural progression of
events to change my ways. Having been ordained for some time, I ended up
with more and more disciples, more people seeking me out. Living and
practising in the forest was something that attracted people to come and
pay respects. So as the number of followers increased, I was forced to
start facing things. I couldn’t run away anymore. My ears had to hear
sounds, my eyes to see. And it was then, as an Ajahn, that I started
gaining more knowledge. It led to a lot of wisdom and a lot of letting
go. There was a lot of everything going on and I learned not to grasp
and hold on, but to keep letting go. It made me a lot more skilful than
before.

When some suffering came about, it was OK; I didn’t add on to it by
trying to escape it. Previously, in my meditation, I had only desired
tranquillity. I thought that the external environment was only useful
insofar as it could be a cause to help me attain tranquillity. I didn’t
think that having *right view* would be the cause for realizing
tranquillity.

I’ve often said that there are two kinds of tranquillity. The wise have
divided it into peace through wisdom and peace through samatha. In peace
through samatha, the eye has to be far from sights, the ear far from
sounds, the nose far from smells and so on. Then not hearing, not
knowing and so forth, one can become tranquil. This kind of peacefulness
is good in its way. Is it of value? Yes, it is, but it is not supreme.
It is short-lived. It doesn’t have a reliable foundation. When the
senses meet objects that are displeasing, the mind changes, because it
doesn’t want those things to be present. So the mind always has to
struggle with these objects and no wisdom is born, since the person
always feels that he is not at peace because of those external factors.

On the other hand, if you determine not to run away but to look directly
at things, you come to realize that lack of tranquillity is not due to
external objects or situations, but only happens because of wrong
understanding. I often teach my disciples about this. I tell them, when
you are intently devoted to finding tranquillity in your meditation, you
can seek out the quietest, most remote place, where you won’t meet with
sights or sounds, where there is nothing going on that will disturb you.
There the mind can settle down and become calm because there is nothing
to provoke it. Then, when you experience this, examine it to see how
much strength it has. When you come out of that place and start
experiencing sense contact, notice how you become pleased and
displeased, gladdened and dejected, and how the mind becomes disturbed.
Then you will understand that this kind of tranquillity is not genuine.

Whatever occurs in your field of experience is merely what it is. When
something pleases us, we decide that it is good and when something
displeases us, we say it isn’t good. That is only our own discriminating
minds giving meaning to external objects. When we understand this, then
we have a basis for investigating these things and seeing them as they
really are. When there is tranquillity in meditation, it’s not necessary
to do a lot of thinking. This sensitivity has a certain knowing quality
that is born of the tranquil mind. This isn’t thinking; it is
*dhammavicaya,* the factor of investigating Dhamma.

This sort of tranquillity does not get disturbed by experience and sense
contact. But then there is the question, ‘If it is tranquillity, why is
there still something going on?’ There is something happening within
tranquillity; it’s not something happening in the ordinary, afflicted
way, where we make more out of it than it really is. When something
happens within tranquillity the mind knows it extremely clearly. Wisdom
is born there and the mind contemplates ever more clearly. We see the
way that things actually happen; when we know the truth of them, then
tranquillity becomes all-inclusive. When the eye sees forms or the ear
hears sounds, we recognize them for what they are. In this latter form
of tranquillity, when the eye sees forms, the mind is peaceful. When the
ear hears sounds, the mind is peaceful. The mind does not waver.
Whatever we experience, the mind is not shaken.

So where does this sort of tranquillity come from? It comes from that
other kind of tranquillity, that unknowing samatha. That is a cause that
enables it to come about. It is taught that wisdom comes from
tranquillity. Knowing comes from unknowing; the mind comes to know from
that state of unknowing, from learning to investigate like this. There
will be both tranquillity and wisdom. Then, wherever we are, whatever we
are doing, we see the truth of things. We know that the arising and
ceasing of experience in the mind is just like that. Then there is
nothing more to do, nothing to correct or solve. There is no more
speculation. There is nowhere to go, no escape. We can only escape
through wisdom, through knowing things as they are and transcending
them.

In the past, when I first established Wat Pah Pong and people started
coming to see me, some disciples said, ‘Luang Por is always socializing
with people. This isn’t a proper place to stay anymore.’ But it wasn’t
that I had gone in search of people; we established a monastery and
people were coming to pay respects to our way of life. Well, I couldn’t
deny what they were saying, but actually I was gaining a lot of wisdom
and coming to know a lot of things. But the disciples had no idea. They
could only look at me and think my practice was degenerating – so many
people were coming, so much disturbance. I didn’t have any way to
convince them otherwise, but as time passed, I overcame the various
obstacles and I finally came to believe that real tranquillity is born
of correct view. If we don’t have right view, then it doesn’t matter
where we stay, we won’t be at peace and wisdom won’t arise.

People are trying to practise here in the West, I’m not criticizing
anyone, but from what I can see, sīla (morality) is not very well
developed. Well, this is a convention. You can start by practising
samādhi first. It’s like walking along and coming across a long piece of
wood. One person can take hold of it at one end. Another person can pick
up the other end. But it’s the same one piece of wood, and taking hold
of either end, you can move it. When there is some calm from samādhi
practice, then the mind can see things clearly and gain wisdom and see
the harm in certain types of behaviour, and the person will have
restraint and caution. You can move the log from either end, but the
main point is to have firm determination in your practice. If you start
with sīla, this restraint will bring calm. That is samādhi and it
becomes a cause for wisdom. When there is wisdom, it helps develop
samādhi further. And samādhi keeps refining sīla. They are actually
synonymous, developing together. In the end, the final result is that
they are one and the same; they are inseparable.

We can’t distinguish samādhi and classify it separately. We can’t
classify wisdom as something separate. We can’t distinguish sīla as
something separate. At first we do distinguish among them. There is the
level of convention, and the level of liberation. On the level of
liberation, we don’t attach to good and bad. Using convention, we
distinguish good and bad and different aspects of practice. This is
necessary to do, but it isn’t yet supreme. If we understand the use of
convention, we can come to understand liberation. Then we can understand
the ways in which different terms are used to bring people to the same
thing.

So in those days, I learned to deal with people, with all sorts of
situations. Coming into contact with all these things, I had to make my
mind firm. Relying on wisdom, I was able to see clearly and abide
without being affected by whatever I met with. Whatever others might be
saying, I wasn’t bothered because I had firm conviction. Those who will
be teachers need this firm conviction in what they are doing, without
being affected by what people say. It requires some wisdom, and whatever
wisdom one has can increase. We take stock of all our old ways as they
are revealed to us and keep cleaning them up.

You really have to make your mind firm. Sometimes there is no ease of
body or mind. It happens when we live together; it’s something natural.
Sometimes we have to face illness, for example. I went through a lot of
that. How would you deal with it? Well, everyone wants to live
comfortably, to have good food and plenty of rest. But we can’t always
have that. We can’t just indulge our wishes. But we create some benefit
in this world through the virtuous efforts we make. We create benefit
for ourselves and for others, for this life and the next. This is the
result of making the mind peaceful.

Coming here to England and the US is the same. It’s a short visit, but
I’ll try to help as I can and offer teaching and guidance. There are
Ajahns and students here, so I’ll try to help them out. Even though
monks haven’t come to live here yet, this is pretty good. This visit can
prepare people for having monks here. If they come too soon, it will be
difficult. Little by little people can become familiar with the practice
and with the ways of the bhikkhusaṅgha. Then the *sāsana* can flourish
here. So for now you have to take care of your own mind and make it
right.
