Detachment Within Activity
==========================

<p class="chapter-footnote" markdown="1">*Note*: This talk has been
published elsewhere under the title: ‘*Sammā Samādhi – Detachment Within
Activity*’</p>

<span class="dropcaps-first" markdown="1">T</span><span
class="dropcaps-words" markdown="1">ake a look at</span>&nbsp; the
example of the Buddha. Both in his own practice and in his methods for
teaching the disciples he was exemplary. The Buddha taught the standards
of practice as skilful means for getting rid of conceit. He couldn’t do
the practice for us. Having heard that teaching, we must further teach
ourselves, practise for ourselves. The results will arise here, not at
the teaching.

The Buddha’s teaching can only enable us to get an initial understanding
of the Dhamma, but the Dhamma is not yet within our hearts. Why not?
Because we haven’t yet practised, we haven’t yet taught ourselves. The
Dhamma arises within the practice. If you know it, you know it through
the practice. If you doubt it, you doubt it in the practice. Teachings
from the Masters may be true, but simply listening to Dhamma is not yet
enough to enable us to realize it. The teaching simply points out the
way to realizing the Dhamma. To realize the Dhamma we must take that
teaching and bring it into our hearts. That part which is for the body
we apply to the body, that part which is for speech we apply to speech,
and that part which is for the mind we apply to the mind. This means
that after hearing the teaching we must further teach ourselves to know
that Dhamma, to be that Dhamma.

The Buddha said that those who simply believe others are not truly wise.
A wise person practises until he is one with the Dhamma, until he can
have confidence in himself, independent of others.

On one occasion, while Venerable Sāriputta was sitting at the Buddha’s
feet, listening respectfully as the Buddha expounded the Dhamma, the
Buddha turned to him and asked,

‘Sāriputta, do you believe this teaching?’

Venerable Sāriputta replied, ‘No, I don’t yet believe it.’

Now this is a good illustration. Venerable Sāriputta listened, and he
took note. When he said he didn’t yet believe he wasn’t being careless,
he was speaking the truth. He simply took note of that teaching, because
he had not yet developed his own understanding of it, so he told the
Buddha that he didn’t yet believe – because he really didn’t believe.
These words almost sound as if Venerable Sāriputta was being rude, but
actually he wasn’t. He spoke the truth, and the Buddha praised him for
it.

‘Good, good, Sāriputta. A wise person doesn’t readily believe. He should
consider first before believing.’

Conviction in a belief can take various forms. One form reasons
according to Dhamma, while another form is contrary to the Dhamma. This
second way is heedless, it is a foolhardy understanding,
*micchā-diṭṭhi*, wrong view. One doesn’t listen to anybody else.

Take the example of Dīghanakha the Brāhman. This Brāhman only believed
himself, he wouldn’t believe others. At one time when the Buddha was
resting at Rājagaha, Dīghanakha went to listen to his teaching. Or you
might say that Dīghanakha went to teach the Buddha because he was intent
on expounding his own views.

‘I am of the view that nothing suits me.’

This was his view. The Buddha listened to Dīghanakha’s view and then
answered,

‘Brāhman, this view of yours doesn’t suit you either.’

When the Buddha had answered in this way, Dīghanakha was stumped. He
didn’t know what to say. The Buddha explained in many ways, till the
Brāhman understood. He stopped to reflect and saw.

‘Hmm, this view of mine isn’t right.’

On hearing the Buddha’s answer the Brāhman abandoned his conceited views
and immediately saw the truth. He changed right then and there, turning
right around, just as one would invert one’s hand. He praised the
teaching of the Buddha thus:

‘Listening to the Blessed One’s teaching, my mind was illumined, just as
one living in darkness might perceive light. My mind is like an
overturned basin which has been uprighted, like a man who has been lost
and finds the way.’

Now at that time a certain knowledge arose within his mind, within that
mind which had been uprighted. Wrong view vanished and right view took
its place. Darkness disappeared and light arose.

The Buddha declared that the Brāhman Dīghanakha was one who had opened
the Dhamma Eye. Previously Dīghanakha clung to his own views and had no
intention of changing them. But when he heard the Buddha’s teaching his
mind saw the truth, he saw that his clinging to those views was wrong.
When the right understanding arose, he was able to perceive his previous
understanding as mistaken, so he compared his experience with a person
living in darkness who had found light. This is how it is. At that time
the Brāhman Dīghanakha transcended his wrong view.

Now we must change in this way. Before we can give up defilements, we
must change our perspective. We must begin to practise correctly and
practise well. Previously we didn’t practise rightly or well, and yet we
thought we were right and good just the same. When we really look into
the matter we upright ourselves, just like turning over one’s hand. This
means that the ‘one who knows’, or wisdom, arises in the mind, so that
it is able to see things anew. A new kind of awareness arises.

Therefore, practitioners must develop this knowing, which we call
*Buddho,* the one who knows, in their minds. Originally the one who
knows is not there, our knowledge is not clear, true or complete. This
knowledge is therefore too weak to train the mind. But then the mind
changes, or inverts, as a result of this awareness, called ‘wisdom’ or
‘insight’, which exceeds our previous awareness. That previous ‘one who
knows’ did not yet know fully and so was unable to bring us to our
objective.

The Buddha therefore taught to look within, *opanayiko.* Look within,
don’t look outwards. Or if you look outwards, then look within to see
the cause and effect therein. Look for the truth in all things, because
external objects and internal objects are always affecting each other.
Our practice is to develop a certain type of awareness until it becomes
stronger than our previous awareness. This causes wisdom and insight to
arise within the mind, enabling us to clearly know the workings of the
mind, the language of the mind and the ways and means of all the
defilements.

The Buddha, when he first left his home in search of liberation, was
probably not really sure what to do, much like us. He tried many ways to
develop his wisdom. He looked for teachers, such as Uddaka Rāmaputta to
practise meditation – right leg on left leg, right hand on left hand,
body erect, eyes closed, letting go of everything until he was able to
attain a high level of absorption (samādhi).[^1] But when he came out of
that samādhi his old thinking came up and he would attach to it just as
before. Seeing this, he knew that wisdom had not yet arisen. His
understanding had not yet penetrated to the truth, it was still
incomplete, still lacking. Seeing this he nonetheless gained some
understanding – that this was not yet the summation of practice – but he
left that place to look for a new teacher.

When the Buddha left his old teacher he didn’t condemn him, he did as
the bee does, it takes nectar from the flower without damaging the
petals.

The Buddha then proceeded to study with Ālāra Kālāma and attained an
even higher state of samādhi, but when he came out of that state Bimba
and Rāhula[^2] came back into his thoughts again, the old memories and
feelings came up again. He still had lust and desire. Reflecting inward
he saw that he still hadn’t reached his goal, so he left that teacher
also. He listened to his teachers and did his best to follow their
teachings. He continually reviewed the results of his practice; he
didn’t simply do things and then discard them for something else.

Then, after trying ascetic practices, he realized that starving until
one is almost a skeleton is simply a matter for the body. The body
doesn’t know anything. Practising in that way was like executing an
innocent person while ignoring the real thief.

When the Buddha really looked into the matter he saw that practise is
not a concern of the body, it is a concern of the mind. The Buddha had
tried *Attakilamathānuyogo* (self-mortification) and found that it was
limited to the body. In fact, all Buddhas are enlightened in mind.

Whether in regard to the body or to the mind, just throw them all
together as transient, imperfect and ownerless – *aniccaṃ* , *dukkhaṃ*
and *anattā*. They are simply conditions of nature. They arise depending
on supporting factors, exist for a while and then cease. When there are
appropriate conditions they arise again; having arisen they exist for a
while, then cease once more. These things are not a ‘self’, a ‘being’,
an ‘us’ or a ‘them’. There’s nobody there, there are simply feelings.
Happiness has no intrinsic self, suffering has no intrinsic self. No
self can be found, there are simply elements of nature which arise,
exist and cease. They go through this constant cycle of change.

All beings, including humans, tend to see the arising as themselves, the
existence as themselves, and the cessation as themselves. Thus they
cling to everything. They don’t want things to be the way they are, they
don’t want them to be otherwise. For instance, having arisen they don’t
want things to cease; having experienced happiness, they don’t want
suffering. If suffering does arise they want it to go away as quickly as
possible, but it is even better if it doesn’t arise at all. This is
because they see this body and mind as themselves, or belonging to
themselves, and so they demand those things to follow their wishes.

This sort of thinking is like building a dam or a dyke without making an
outlet to let the water through. The result is that the dam bursts. And
so it is with this kind of thinking. The Buddha saw that thinking in
this way is the cause of suffering. Seeing this cause, the Buddha gave
it up.

This is the Noble Truth of the cause of suffering. The truths of
suffering, its cause, its cessation and the way leading to that
cessation – people are stuck right here. If people are to overcome their
doubts, it’s right at this point. Seeing that these things are simply
*rūpa* and *nāma,* or corporeality and mentality, it becomes obvious
that they are not a being, a person, an ‘us’, or a ‘them’. They simply
follow the laws of nature.

Our practice is to know things in this way. We don’t have the power to
really control these things, we aren’t really their owners. Trying to
control them causes suffering, because they aren’t really ours to
control. Neither body nor mind are ‘self’ or ‘other’. If we know this as
it really is, then we see clearly. We see the truth, we are at one with
it. It’s like seeing a lump of red hot iron which has been heated in a
furnace. It’s hot all over. Whether we touch it on top, the bottom or
the sides it’s hot. No matter where we touch it, it’s hot. This is how
you should see things.

Mostly when we start to practise we want to attain, to achieve, to know
and to see, but we don’t yet know what it is we’re going to achieve or
know. There was once a disciple of mine whose practice was plagued with
confusion and doubts. But he kept practising, and I kept instructing
him, till he began to find some peace. But when he eventually became a
bit calm he got caught up in his doubts again, saying, ‘What do I do
next?’ There! The confusion arises again. He says he wants peace but
when he gets it, he doesn’t want it, he asks what he should do next!

So in this practice we must do everything with detachment. How are we to
detach? We detach by seeing things clearly. Know the characteristics of
the body and mind as they are. We meditate in order to find peace, but
in doing so we see that which is not peaceful. This is because movement
is the nature of the mind.

When practising samādhi we fix our attention on the in-breath and
out-breath at the nose tip or the upper lip. This ‘lifting’ the mind to
fix it is called *vitakka,* or ‘lifting up’. When we have thus ‘lifted’
the mind and are fixed on an object, this is called *vicāra,* the
contemplation of the breath at the nose tip. This quality of *vicāra*
will naturally mingle with other mental sensations, and we may think
that our mind is not still, that it won’t calm down, but actually this
is simply the workings of *vicāra* as it mingles with those sensations.
Now if this goes too far in the wrong direction, our mind will lose its
collectedness. So then we must set up the mind afresh, lifting it up to
the object of concentration with *vitakka*. As soon as we have thus
established our attention *vicāra* takes over, mingling with the various
mental sensations.

Now when we see this happening, our lack of understanding may lead us to
wonder: ‘Why has my mind wandered? I wanted it to be still, why isn’t it
still?’ This is practising with attachment.

Actually the mind is simply following its nature, but we go and add on
to that activity by wanting the mind to be still and thinking, ‘Why
isn’t it still?’ Aversion arises and so we add that on to everything
else, increasing our doubts, increasing our suffering and increasing our
confusion. So if there is *vicāra*, reflecting on the various happenings
within the mind in this way, we should wisely consider, ‘Ah, the mind is
simply like this.’ There, that’s the one who knows talking, telling you
to see things as they are. The mind is simply like this. We let it go at
that and the mind becomes peaceful. When it’s no longer centred we bring
up *vitakka* once more, and shortly there is calm again. *Vitakka* and
*vicāra* work together like this. We use *vicāra* to contemplate the
various sensations which arise. When *vicāra* becomes gradually more
scattered we once again ‘lift’ our attention with *vitakka*.

The important thing here is that our practice at this point must be done
with detachment. Seeing the process of *vicāra* interacting with the
mental sensations we may think that the mind is confused and become
averse to this process. This is the cause right here. We aren’t happy
simply because we want the mind to be still. This is the cause – wrong
view. If we correct our view just a little, seeing this activity as
simply the nature of mind, just this is enough to subdue the confusion.
This is called letting go.

Now, if we don’t attach, if we practise with ‘letting go’ – detachment
within activity and activity within detachment – if we learn to practise
like this, then *vicāra* will naturally tend to have less to work with.
If our mind ceases to be disturbed, then *vicāra* will incline to
contemplating Dhamma, because if we don’t contemplate Dhamma, the mind
returns to distraction.

So there is *vitakka* then *vicāra*, *vitakka* then *vicāra*, *vitakka*
then *vicāra* and so on, until *vicāra* becomes gradually more subtle.
At first *vicāra* goes all over the place. When we understand this as
simply the natural activity of the mind, it won’t bother us unless we
attach to it. It’s like flowing water. If we get obsessed with it,
asking ‘Why does it flow?’ then naturally we suffer. If we understand
that the water simply flows because that’s its nature, then there’s no
suffering. *Vicāra* is like this. There is *vitakka*, then *vicāra*,
interacting with mental sensations. We can take these sensations as our
object of meditation, calming the mind by noting those sensations.

If we know the nature of the mind like this, then we let go, just like
letting the water flow by. *Vicāra* becomes more and more subtle.
Perhaps the mind inclines to contemplating the body, or death for
instance, or some other theme of Dhamma. When the theme of contemplation
is right, there will arise a feeling of well-being. What is that
well-being? It is *pīti* (rapture). *Pīti*, well-being, arises. It may
manifest as goose-pimples, coolness or lightness. The mind is enrapt.
This is called *pīti*. There is also pleasure, *sukha,* the coming and
going of various sensations; and the state of *ekaggatārammaṇa,* or
one-pointedness.

Now if we talk in terms of the first stage of concentration, it must be
like this: *vitakka*, *vicāra*, *pīti*, *sukha*, *ekaggatā*. So what is
the second stage like? As the mind becomes progressively more subtle,
*vitakka* and *vicāra* become comparatively coarser, so that they are
discarded, leaving only *pīti*, *sukha*, and *ekaggatā*. This is
something that the mind does of itself, we don’t have to conjecture
about it, we just know things as they are.

As the mind becomes more refined, *pīti* is eventually thrown off,
leaving only *sukha* and *ekaggatā*, and so we take note of that. Where
does *pīti* go to? It doesn’t go anywhere, it’s just that the mind
becomes increasingly more subtle so that it throws off those qualities
that are too coarse for it. Whatever is too coarse it throws out, and it
keeps throwing off like this until it reaches the peak of subtlety,
known in the books as the fourth *jhāna*, the highest level of
absorption. Here the mind has progressively discarded whatever becomes
too coarse for it, until only *ekaggatā* and *upekkhā,* equanimity
remain. There’s nothing further, this is the limit.

When the mind is developing the stages of samādhi it must proceed in
this way, but please let us understand the basics of practice. We want
to make the mind still but it won’t be still. This is practising out of
desire, but we don’t realize it. We have the desire for calm. The mind
is already disturbed and then we further disturb things by wanting to
make it calm. This very wanting is the cause. We don’t see that this
wanting to calm the mind is *taṇhā.* It’s just like increasing the
burden. The more we desire calm the more disturbed the mind becomes,
until we just give up. We end up fighting all the time, sitting and
struggling with ourselves.

Why is this? Because we don’t reflect back on how we have set up the
mind. Know that the conditions of mind are simply the way they are.
Whatever arises, just observe it. It is simply the nature of the mind;
it isn’t harmful unless we don’t understand its nature. It’s not
dangerous if we see its activity for what it is. So we practise with
*vitakka* and *vicāra* until the mind begins to settle down and becomes
less forceful. When sensations arise we contemplate them, we mingle with
them and come to know them.

However, usually we tend to start fighting with them, because right from
the beginning we’re determined to calm the mind. As soon as we sit, the
thoughts come to bother us. As soon as we set up our meditation object
our attention wanders, the mind wanders off following all the thoughts,
thinking that those thoughts have come to disturb us, but actually the
problem arises right here, from the very wanting to calm the mind.

If we see that the mind is simply behaving according to its nature, that
it naturally comes and goes like this, and if we don’t get
over-interested in it, we can understand that its ways are much the same
as a child. Children don’t know any better, they may say all kinds of
things. If we understand them we just let them talk, because children
naturally talk like that. When we let go like this, we are not obsessed
with the child. We can talk to our guests undisturbed, while the child
chatters and plays around. The mind is like this. It’s not harmful
unless we grab on to it and get obsessed over it. That’s the real cause
of trouble.

When *pīti* arises one feels an indescribable pleasure, which only those
who experience it can appreciate. *Sukha* (pleasure) arises, and there
is also the quality of one-pointedness. There is *vitakka*, *vicāra*,
*pīti*, *sukha* and *ekaggatā*. These five qualities all converge at one
place. Even though they are different qualities they are all collected
in one place, and we can see them all there, just like seeing many
different kinds of fruit in one bowl. *Vitakka*, *vicāra*, *pīti*,
*sukha* and *ekaggatā* – we can see them all in one mind, all five
qualities. If one were to ask, ‘How is there *vitakka*, how is there
*vicāra*, how is there *pīti* and *sukha*? ’It would be difficult to
answer, but when they converge in the mind we will see how it is for
ourselves.

At this point our practice becomes somewhat special. We must have
recollection and self-awareness and not lose ourselves. Know things for
what they are. These are stages of meditation, the potential of the
mind. Don’t doubt anything with regard to the practice. Even if you sink
into the earth or fly into the air, or even ‘die’ while sitting, don’t
doubt it. Whatever the qualities of the mind are, just stay with the
knowing. This is our foundation: to have sati, recollection, and
*sampajañña,* self-awareness, whether standing, walking, sitting, or
reclining. Whatever arises, just leave it be, don’t cling to it. Whether
it’s like or dislike, happiness or suffering, doubt or certainty,
contemplate with *vicāra* and gauge the results of those qualities.
Don’t try to label everything, just know it. See that all the things
that arise in the mind are simply sensations. They are transient. They
arise, exist and cease. That’s all there is to them, they have no self
or being, they are neither ‘us’ nor ‘them’. None of them are worthy of
clinging to.

When we see all *rūpa* and *nāma* in this way with wisdom, then we will
see the old tracks. We will see the transience of the mind, the
transience of the body, the transience of happiness, suffering, love and
hate. They are all impermanent. Seeing this, the mind becomes weary;
weary of the body and mind, weary of the things that arise and cease and
their transience. When the mind becomes disenchanted it will look for a
way out of all those things. It no longer wants to be stuck in things,
it sees the inadequacy of this world and the inadequacy of birth.

When the mind sees like this, wherever we go, we see *aniccaṃ*
(transience), *dukkhaṃ* (imperfection) and *anattā* (ownerlessness).
There’s nothing left to hold on to. Whether we sit at the foot of a
tree, on a mountain top or in a valley, we can hear the Buddha’s
teaching. All trees will seem as one, all beings will be as one, there’s
nothing special about any of them. They arise, exist for a while, age
and then die, all of them.

We thus see the world more clearly, we see this body and mind more
clearly. They are clearer in the light of transience, clearer in the
light of imperfection and clearer in the light of ownerlessness. If
people hold fast to things, they suffer. This is how suffering arises.
If we see that body and mind are simply the way they are, no suffering
arises, because we don’t hold fast to them. Wherever we go we will have
wisdom. Even when seeing a tree we can consider it with wisdom. Seeing
grass and the various insects will be food for reflection.

When it all comes down to it, they all fall into the same boat. They are
all Dhamma, they are invariably transient. This is the truth, this is
the true Dhamma, this is certain. How is it certain? It is certain in
that the world is that way and can never be otherwise. There’s nothing
more to it than this. If we can see in this way, we have finished our
journey.

In Buddhism, with regard to view, it is said that to feel that we are
more foolish than others is not right; to feel that we are equal to
others is not right; and to feel that we are better than others is not
right, because there isn’t any ‘we’. This is how it is, we must uproot
conceit.

This is called *lokavidū* – knowing the world clearly as it is. If we
thus see the truth, the mind will know itself completely and will sever
the cause of suffering. When there is no longer any cause, the results
can not arise. This is the way our practice should proceed.

The basics which we need to develop are: firstly, to be upright and
honest; secondly, to be wary of wrongdoing; thirdly, to have the
attribute of humility within our heart, to be aloof and content with
little. If we are content with little in regards to speech and all other
things, we will see ourselves, we won’t be drawn into distractions. The
mind will have a foundation of sīla, samādhi, and paññā.

Therefore, practitioners of the path should not be careless. Even if you
are right, don’t be careless. And if you are wrong, don’t be careless.
If things are going well or you’re feeling happy, don’t be careless. Why
do I say ‘don’t be careless’? Because all of these things are uncertain.
Note them as such. If you get peaceful just leave the peace be. You may
really want to indulge in it but you should simply know the truth of it,
the same as for unpleasant qualities.

This practice of the mind is up to each individual. The teacher only
explains the way to train the mind, because that mind is within each
individual. We know what’s in there, nobody else can know our mind as
well as we can. The practice requires this kind of honesty. Do it
properly, don’t do it half-heartedly. When I say ‘do it properly,’ does
that mean you have to exhaust yourselves? No, you don’t have to exhaust
yourselves, because the practice is done in the mind. If you know this,
you will know the practice. You don’t need a whole lot. Just use the
standards of practice to reflect on yourself inwardly.

Now the Rains Retreat is half way over. For most people it’s normal to
let the practice slacken off after a while. They aren’t consistent from
beginning to end. This shows that their practice is not yet mature. For
instance, having determined a particular practice at the beginning of
the retreat, whatever it may be, then we must fulfil that resolution.
For these three months make the practice consistent. You must all try.
Whatever you have determined to practise, consider that and reflect
whether the practice has slackened off. If so, make an effort to
re-establish it. Keep shaping up the practice, just the same as when we
practise meditation on the breath. As the breath goes in and out the
mind gets distracted. Then re-establish your attention on the breath.
When your attention wanders off again bring it back once more. This is
the same. In regard to both the body and the mind the practice proceeds
like this. Please make an effort with it.

[^1]: The level of nothingness, one of the ‘formless absorptions’,
    sometimes called the seventh *jhāna*, or absorption.

[^2]: Bimba, or Princess Yasodharā, the Buddha’s former wife; Rāhula,
    his son.
