Dhamma Fighting
===============

\<span class="dropcaps-first"\>F\</span\>\<span
class="dropcaps-words"\>ight greed, fight aversion,\</span\> fight
delusion – these are the enemy. In the practice of Buddhism, the path of
the Buddha, we fight with Dhamma, using patient endurance. We fight by
resisting our countless moods.

Dhamma and the world are interrelated. Where there is Dhamma there is
the world, where there is the world there is Dhamma. Where there are
defilements there are those who conquer defilements, who do battle with
them. This is called fighting inwardly. To fight outwardly people take
hold of bombs and guns to throw and to shoot; they conquer and are
conquered. Conquering others is the way of the world. In the practice of
Dhamma we don’t have to fight others, but instead conquer our own minds,
patiently enduring and resisting all our moods.

When it comes to Dhamma practice we don’t harbour resentment and enmity
amongst ourselves, but instead let go of all forms of ill will in our
own actions and thoughts, freeing ourselves from jealousy, aversion and
resentment. Hatred can only be overcome by not harbouring resentment and
bearing grudges.

Hurtful actions and reprisals are different but closely related. Actions
once done are finished with; there’s no need to answer with revenge and
hostility. This is called ‘action’ (). ‘Reprisal’ () means to continue
that action further with thoughts of ‘You did it to me so I’m going to
get you back.’ There’s no end to this. It brings about the continual
seeking of revenge, and so hatred is never abandoned. As long as we
behave like this the chain remains unbroken, there’s no end to it. No
matter where we go, the feuding continues.

The supreme teacher[^1] taught the world; he had compassion for all
worldly beings. But the world nevertheless goes on like this. The wise
should look into this and select those things which are of true value.
The Buddha had trained in the various arts of warfare as a prince, but
he saw that they weren’t really useful; they are limited to the world
with its fighting and aggression.

Therefore, we who have left the world, need to train ourselves; we must
learn to give up all forms of evil, giving up all those things which are
the cause for enmity. We conquer ourselves, we don’t try to conquer
others. We fight, but we fight only the defilements; if there is greed,
we fight that; if there is aversion, we fight that; if there is
delusion, we strive to give it up.

This is called ‘Dhamma fighting’. This warfare of the heart is really
difficult, in fact it’s the most difficult thing of all. We become monks
in order to contemplate this, to learn the art of fighting greed,
aversion and delusion. This is our prime responsibility.

This is the inner battle, fighting with defilements. But there are very
few people who fight like this. Most people fight with other things,
they rarely fight defilements. They rarely even see them.

The Buddha taught us to give up all forms of evil and to cultivate
virtue. This is the right path. Teaching in this way is like the Buddha
picking us up and placing us at the beginning of the path. Having
reached the path, whether we walk along it or not is up to us. The
Buddha’s job is finished right there. He shows the way, that which is
right and that which is not right. This much is enough, the rest is up
to us.

Now, having reached the path we still don’t know anything, we still
haven’t seen anything; so we must learn. To learn we must be prepared to
endure some hardship, just like students in the world. It’s difficult
enough to obtain the knowledge and learning necessary for them to pursue
their careers. They have to endure. When they think wrongly or feel
averse or lazy they must force themselves to continue before they can
graduate and get a job. The practice for a monk is similar. If we
determine to practise and contemplate, then we will surely see the way.

is a harmful thing. means ‘view’ or ‘opinion’. All forms of view are
called : seeing good as evil, seeing evil as good – any way whatsoever
that we see things. This is not the problem. The problem lies with the
clinging to those views, called holding on to those views as if they
were the truth. This leads us to spin around from birth to death, never
reaching completion, just because of that clinging. So the Buddha urged
us to let go of views.

If many people live together, as we do here, they can still practise
comfortably if their views are in harmony. But even two or three monks
would have difficulty living together if their views were not good or
harmonious. When we humble ourselves and let go of our views, even if
there are many of us, we come together at the place of the

It’s not true to say that there will be disharmony just because there
are many of us. Just look at a millipede. A millipede has many legs,
doesn’t it? Just looking at it you’d think it would have difficulty
walking, but actually it doesn’t. It has its own order and rhythm. In
our practice it’s the same. If we practise as the Noble Saṅgha of the
Buddha practised, then it’s easy. That is, – those who practise well; –
those who practise straightly; – those who practise to transcend
suffering, and – those who practise properly. These four qualities,
established within us, will make us true members of the Saṅgha. Even if
we number in the hundreds or thousands, no matter how many we are, we
all travel the same path. We come from different backgrounds, but we are
the same. Even though our views may differ, if we practise correctly
there will be no friction. Just like all the rivers and streams which
flow to the sea, once they enter the sea they all have the same taste
and colour. It’s the same with people. When they enter the stream of
Dhamma, it’s the one Dhamma. Even though they come from different
places, they harmonize, they merge.

But the thinking which causes all the disputes and conflict is .
Therefore the Buddha taught us to let go of views. Don’t allow to cling
to those views beyond their relevance.

The Buddha taught the value of constant recollection. Whether we are
standing, walking, sitting or reclining, wherever we are, we should have
this power of recollection. When we have sati we see ourselves, we see
our own minds. We see the ‘body within the body’, ‘the mind within the
mind’. If we don’t have sati we don’t know anything, we aren’t aware of
what is happening.

So sati is very important. With constant sati we will listen to the
Dhamma of the Buddha at all times. This is because ‘eye seeing forms’ is
Dhamma; ‘ear hearing sounds’ is Dhamma; ‘nose smelling odours’ is
Dhamma; ‘tongue tasting flavours’ is Dhamma; ‘body feeling sensations’
is Dhamma; when impressions arise in the mind, that is Dhamma also.
Therefore one who has constant sati always hears the Buddha’s teaching.
The Dhamma is always there. Why? Because of sati, because we are aware.

Sati is recollection, is self-awareness. This awareness is the actual
the Buddha. When there is , understanding will follow. We know what is
going on. When the eye sees forms: is this proper or improper? When the
ear hears sound: is this appropriate or inappropriate? Is it harmful? Is
it wrong, is it right? And so on like this with everything. If we
understand we hear the Dhamma all the time.

So let us all understand that right now we are learning in the midst of
Dhamma. Whether we go forward or step back, we meet the Dhamma – it’s
all Dhamma if we have sati. Even seeing the animals running around in
the forest we can reflect, seeing that all animals are the same as us.
They run away from suffering and chase after happiness, just as people
do. Whatever they don’t like they avoid; they are afraid of dying, just
like people. If we reflect on this, we see that all beings in the world,
people as well, are the same in their various instincts. Thinking like
this is called seeing according to the truth, that all beings are
companions in birth, old age, sickness and death. Animals are the same
as human beings and human beings are the same as animals. If we really
see things the way they are our mind will give up attachment to them.

Therefore it is said we must have sati. If we have sati we will see the
state of our own mind. Whatever we are thinking or feeling we must know
it. This knowing is called , the Buddha, the who knows thoroughly, who
knows clearly and completely. When the mind knows completely we find the
right practice.

So the straight way to practise is to have mindfulness, sati. If you are
without sati for five minutes you are crazy for five minutes, heedless
for five minutes. Whenever you are lacking in sati you are crazy. So
sati is essential. To have sati is to know yourself, to know the
condition of your mind and your life. This is to have understanding and
discernment, to listen to the Dhamma at all times. After leaving the
teacher’s discourse, you still hear the Dhamma, because the Dhamma is
everywhere.

So therefore, all of you, be sure to practise every day. Whether you are
lazy or diligent, practise just the same. Practice of the Dhamma is not
done by following your moods. If you practise following your moods then
it’s not Dhamma. Don’t discriminate between day and night, whether the
mind is peaceful or not – just practise.

It’s like a child who is learning to write. At first he doesn’t write
nicely – big, long loops and squiggles – he writes like a child. After a
while the writing improves through practice. Practising the Dhamma is
like this. At first you are awkward, sometimes you are calm, sometimes
not, you don’t really know what’s what. Some people get discouraged.
Don’t slacken off! You must persevere with the practice. Live with
effort, just like the schoolboy: as he gets older he writes better and
better. From writing badly he grows to write beautifully, all because of
the practice from childhood.

Our practice is like this. Try to have recollection at all times:
standing, walking, sitting or reclining. When we perform our various
duties smoothly and well, we feel peace of mind. When there is peace of
mind in our work it’s easy to have peaceful meditation; they go hand in
hand. So make an effort. You should all make an effort to follow the
practice. This is training.

[^1]: That is, the Buddha.
