Steady Practice
===============

<p class="chapter-footnote" markdown="1">*Note*: This talk has been
published elsewhere under the title: ‘*Right Practice – Steady
Practice*’</p>

<span class="dropcaps-first" markdown="1">W</span><span
class="dropcaps-words" markdown="1">at Wana Potiyahn</span>&nbsp;[^1]
here is certainly very peaceful, but this is meaningless if our minds
are not calm. All places are peaceful. That some may seem distracting is
because of our minds. However, a quiet place can help us to become calm,
by giving us the opportunity to train and thus harmonize with its calm.

You should all bear in mind that this practice is difficult. To train in
other things is not so difficult, it’s easy, but the human mind is hard
to train. The Lord Buddha trained his mind. The mind is the important
thing. Everything within this body-mind system comes together at the
mind. The eyes, ears, nose, tongue and body all receive sensations and
send them into the mind, which is the supervisor of all the other sense
organs. Therefore, it is important to train the mind. If the mind is
well trained, all problems come to an end. If there are still problems,
it’s because the mind still doubts, it doesn’t know in accordance with
the truth. That is why there are problems.

So recognize that all of you have come fully prepared for practising
Dhamma. Whether standing, walking, sitting or reclining, you are
provided with the tools you need to practise, wherever you are. They are
there, just like the Dhamma. The Dhamma is something which abounds
everywhere. Right here, on land or in water, wherever, the Dhamma is
always there. The Dhamma is perfect and complete, but it’s our practice
that’s not yet complete.

The Lord, the fully enlightened Buddha, taught a means by which all of
us may practise and come to know this Dhamma. It isn’t a big thing, only
a small thing, but it’s right. For example, look at hair. If we know
even one strand of hair, then we know every strand, both our own and
also that of others. We know that they are all simply ‘hair’. By knowing
one strand of hair we know it all.

Or consider people. If we see the true nature of conditions within
ourselves, then we know all the other people in the world also, because
all people are the same. Dhamma is like this. It’s a small thing and yet
it’s big. That is, to see the truth of one condition is to see the truth
of them all. When we know the truth as it is, all problems come to an
end.

Nevertheless, the training is difficult. Why is it difficult? It’s
difficult because of wanting, *taṇhā.* If you don’t ‘want’ then you
don’t practise. But if you practise out of desire you won’t see the
Dhamma. Think about it, all of you. If you don’t want to practise, you
can’t practise. You must first want to practise in order to actually do
the practice. Whether stepping forward or stepping back you meet desire.
This is why the cultivators of the past have said that this practice is
something that’s extremely difficult to do.

You don’t see Dhamma because of desire. Sometimes desire is very strong,
you want to see the Dhamma immediately, but the Dhamma is not your mind
– your mind is not yet Dhamma. The Dhamma is one thing and the mind is
another. It’s not that whatever you like is Dhamma and whatever you
don’t like isn’t. That’s not the way it goes.

Actually this mind of ours is simply a condition of nature, like a tree
in the forest. If you want a plank or a beam, it must come from a tree,
but a tree is still only a tree. It’s not yet a beam or a plank. Before
it can really be of use to us we must take that tree and saw it into
beams or planks. It’s the same tree but it becomes transformed into
something else. Intrinsically it’s just a tree, a condition of nature.
But in its raw state it isn’t yet of much use to those who need timber.
Our mind is like this. It is a condition of nature. As such it perceives
thoughts, it discriminates into beautiful and ugly and so on.

This mind of ours must be further trained. We can’t just let it be. It’s
a condition of nature! Train it to realize that it’s a condition of
nature. Improve on nature so that it’s appropriate to our needs, which
is Dhamma. Dhamma is something which must be practised and brought
within.

If you don’t practise you won’t know. Frankly speaking, you won’t know
the Dhamma by just reading it or studying it. Or if you do know it, your
knowledge is still defective. For example, this spittoon here. Everybody
knows it’s a spittoon but they don’t fully know the spittoon. Why don’t
they fully know it? If I called this spittoon a saucepan, what would you
say? Suppose that every time I asked for it I said, ‘Please bring that
saucepan over here,’ that would confuse you. Why so? Because you don’t
fully know the spittoon. If you did, there would be no problem. You
would simply pick up that object and hand it to me, because actually
there isn’t any spittoon. Do you understand? It’s a spittoon due to
convention. This convention is accepted all over the country, so it’s a
spittoon. But there isn’t any real ‘spittoon’. If somebody wants to call
it a saucepan it can be a saucepan. It can be whatever you call it. This
is called ‘concept’. If we fully know the spittoon, even if somebody
calls it a saucepan there’s no problem. Whatever others may call it, we
are unperturbed because we are not blind to its true nature. This is one
who knows Dhamma.

Now let’s come back to ourselves. Suppose somebody said, ‘You’re crazy!’
or, ‘You’re stupid,’ for example. Even though it may not be true, you
wouldn’t feel so good. Everything becomes difficult because of our
ambitions to have and to achieve. Because of these desires to get and to
be, because we don’t know according to the truth, we have no
contentment. If we know the Dhamma, are enlightened to the Dhamma,
greed, aversion and delusion will disappear. When we understand the way
things are, there is nothing for them to rest on.

Why is the practice so difficult and arduous? Because of desires. As
soon as we sit down to meditate we want to become peaceful. If we didn’t
want to find peace we wouldn’t sit, we wouldn’t practise. As soon as we
sit down we want peace to be right there, but wanting the mind to be
calm makes for confusion, and we feel restless. This is how it goes. So
the Buddha says, ‘Don’t speak out of desire, don’t sit out of desire,
don’t walk out of desire. Whatever you do, don’t do it with desire.’
Desire means wanting. If you don’t want to do something you won’t do it.
If our practice reaches this point, we can get quite discouraged. How
can we practise? As soon as we sit down there is desire in the mind.

It’s because of this that the body and mind are difficult to observe. If
they are not the self nor belonging to self, then who do they belong to?
Because it’s difficult to resolve these things, we must rely on wisdom.
The Buddha says we must practise with ‘letting go’. But if we let go,
then we just don’t practise, right? Because we’ve let go.

Suppose we went to buy some coconuts in the market, and while we were
carrying them back someone asked:

‘What did you buy those coconuts for?’

‘I bought them to eat.’

‘Are you going to eat the shells as well?’

‘No.’

‘I don’t believe you. If you’re not going to eat the shells then why did
you buy them also?’

Well what do you say? How are you going to answer their question? We
practise with desire. If we didn’t have desire we wouldn’t practise.
Practising with desire is *taṇhā*. Contemplating in this way can give
rise to wisdom, you know. For example, those coconuts: Are you going to
eat the shells as well? Of course not. Then why do you take them?
Because the time hasn’t yet come for you to throw them away. They’re
useful for wrapping up the coconut in. If, after eating the coconut, you
throw the shells away, there is no problem.

Our practice is like this. The Buddha said, ‘Don’t act on desire, don’t
speak from desire, don’t eat with desire.’ Standing, walking, sitting or
reclining, whatever, don’t do it with desire. This means to do it with
detachment. It’s just like buying the coconuts from the market. We’re
not going to eat the shells but it’s not yet time to throw them away. We
keep them first.

This is how the practice is. Concept (*sammuti*) and transcendence
(*vimutti*) are co-existent, just like a coconut. The flesh, the husk
and the shell are all together. When we buy a coconut we buy the whole
lot. If somebody wants to accuse us of eating coconut shells that’s
their business, we know what we’re doing.

Wisdom is something each of us finds for oneself. To see it we must go
neither fast nor slow. What should we do? Go to where there is neither
fast nor slow. Going fast or going slow is not the way.

But we’re all impatient, we’re in a hurry. As soon as we begin we want
to rush to the end, we don’t want to be left behind. We want to succeed.
When it comes to fixing their minds for meditation some people go too
far. They light the incense, prostrate and make a vow, ‘As long as this
incense is not yet completely burnt I will not rise from my sitting,
even if I collapse or die, no matter what, I’ll die sitting.’ Having
made their vow they start their sitting. As soon as they start to sit,
Māra’s hordes come rushing at them from all sides. They’ve only sat for
an instant and already they think the incense must be finished. They
open their eyes for a peek, ‘Oh, there’s still ages left!’

They grit their teeth and sit some more, feeling hot, flustered,
agitated and confused. Reaching the breaking point they think, ‘It
*must* be finished by now’. They have another peek. ‘Oh, no! It’s not
even *half-way* yet!’

Two or three times and it’s still not finished, so they just give up,
pack it in and sit there hating themselves. ‘I’m so stupid, I’m so
hopeless!’ They sit and hate themselves, feeling like a hopeless case.
This just gives rise to frustration and hindrances. This is called the
hindrance of ill-will. They can’t blame others so they blame themselves.
And why is this? It’s all because of wanting.

Actually it isn’t necessary to go through all that. To concentrate means
to concentrate with detachment, not to concentrate yourself into knots.
But maybe we read the scriptures about the life of the Buddha, how he
sat under the Bodhi tree and determined to himself:

‘As long as I have still not attained Supreme Enlightenment I will not
rise from this place, even if my blood dries up.’

Reading this in the books you may think of trying it yourself. You’ll do
it like the Buddha. But you haven’t considered that your car is only a
small one. The Buddha’s car was a really big one, he could take it all
in one go. With only your tiny, little car, how can you possibly take it
all at once? It’s a different story altogether.

Why do we think like that? Because we’re too extreme. Sometimes we go
too low, sometimes we go too high. The point of balance is so hard to
find.

Now I’m only speaking from experience. In the past my practice was like
this. Practising in order to get beyond wanting. If we don’t want, can
we practise? I was stuck here. But to practise with wanting is
suffering. I didn’t know what to do, I was baffled. Then I realized that
the practice which is steady is the important thing. One must practise
consistently. They call this the practice that is ‘consistent in all
postures’. Keep refining the practice, don’t let it become a disaster.
Practice is one thing, disaster is another.[^2] Most people usually
create disaster. When they feel lazy they don’t bother to practise, they
only practise when they feel energetic. This is how I tended to be.

All of you ask yourselves now, is this right? To practise when you feel
like it, not when you don’t: is that in accordance with the Dhamma? Is
it straight? Is it in line with the teaching? This is what makes
practice inconsistent.

Whether you feel like it or not you should practise just the same: this
is how the Buddha taught. Most people wait till they’re in the mood
before practising; when they don’t feel like it they don’t bother. This
is as far as they go. This is called ‘disaster’, it’s not practice. In
the true practice, whether you are happy or depressed you practice;
whether it’s easy or difficult you practise; whether it’s hot or cold
you practise. It’s straight like this. In the real practice, whether
standing, walking, sitting or reclining you must have the intention to
continue the practice steadily, making your sati consistent in all
postures.

At first thought it seems as if you should stand for as long as you
walk, walk for as long as you sit, sit for as long as you lie down. I’ve
tried it but I couldn’t do it. If a meditator were to make his standing,
walking, sitting and lying down all equal, how many days could he keep
it up for? Stand for five minutes, sit for five minutes, lie down for
five minutes. I couldn’t do it for very long. So I sat down and thought
about it some more. ‘What does it all mean? People in this world can’t
practise like this!’

Then I realized. ‘Oh, that’s not right, it can’t be right because it’s
impossible to do. Standing, walking, sitting, reclining … make them all
consistent. To make the postures consistent the way they explain it in
the books is impossible.’

But it is possible to do this: the mind, just consider the mind. To have
sati, recollection, *sampajañña,* self-awareness, and paññā, all-round
wisdom, this you can do. This is something that’s really worth
practising. This means that while standing we have sati, while walking
we have sati, while sitting we have sati, and while reclining we have
sati – consistently. This is possible. We put awareness into our
standing, walking, sitting, lying down – into all postures.

When the mind has been trained like this it will constantly recollect
*Buddho, Buddho, Buddho* … which is knowing. Knowing what? Knowing what
is right and what is wrong at all times. Yes, this is possible. This is
getting down to the real practice. That is, whether standing, walking,
sitting or lying down there is continuous sati.

Then you should understand those conditions which should be given up and
those which should be cultivated. You know happiness, you know
unhappiness. When you know happiness and unhappiness your mind will
settle at the point which is free of happiness and unhappiness.
Happiness is the loose path, *kāmasukhallikānuyogo*. Unhappiness is the
tight path, *attakilamathānuyogo*.[^3] If we know these two extremes, we
pull it back. We know when the mind is inclining towards happiness or
unhappiness and we pull it back, we don’t allow it to lean over. We have
this sort of awareness, we adhere to the One Path, the single Dhamma. We
adhere to the awareness, not allowing the mind to follow its
inclinations.

But in your practice it doesn’t tend to be like that, does it? You
follow your inclinations. If you follow your inclinations it’s easy,
isn’t it? But this is the ease which causes suffering, like someone who
can’t be bothered working. He takes it easy, but when the time comes to
eat he hasn’t got anything. This is how it goes.

I’ve contended with many aspects of the Buddha’s teaching in the past,
but I couldn’t really beat him. Nowadays I accept it. I accept that the
many teachings of the Buddha are straight down the line, so I’ve taken
those teachings and used them to train both myself and others.

The practice which is important is *paṭipadā.* What is *paṭipadā*? It is
simply all our various activities: standing, walking, sitting, reclining
and everything else. This is the *paṭipadā* of the body. Now the
*paṭipadā* of the mind: how many times in the course of today have you
felt low? How many times have you felt high? Have there been any
noticeable feelings? We must know ourselves like this. Having seen those
feelings, can we let go? Whatever we can’t yet let go of, we must work
with. When we see that we can’t yet let go of some particular feeling,
we must take it and examine it with wisdom. Reason it out. Work with it.
This is practice. For example, when you are feeling zealous, practise,
and when you feel lazy, try to continue the practice. If you can’t
continue at ‘full speed’ then at least do half as much. Don’t just waste
the day away by being lazy and not practising. Doing that will lead to
disaster, it’s not the way of a practitioner.

Now I’ve heard some people say, ‘Oh, this year I was really in a bad
way.’

‘How come?’

‘I was sick all year. I couldn’t practise at all.’

Oh! If they don’t practise when death is near, when will they ever
practise? If they’re feeling well, do you think they’ll practise? No,
they only get lost in happiness. If they’re suffering they still don’t
practise, they get lost in that. I don’t know when people think they’re
going to practise! They can only see that they’re sick, in pain, almost
dead from fever – that’s right, bring it on heavy, that’s where the
practice is. When people are feeling happy it just goes to their heads
and they get vain and conceited.

We must cultivate our practice. What this means is that whether you are
happy or unhappy you must practise just the same. If you are feeling
well you should practise, and if you are feeling sick you should also
practise. There are those who think, ‘This year I couldn’t practise at
all, I was sick the whole time’. If these people are feeling well, they
just walk around singing songs. This is wrong thinking, not right
thinking. This is why the practitioners of the past have all maintained
the steady training of the heart. If things go wrong, just let them be
with the body, not in the mind.

There was a time in my practice, after I had been practising about five
years, when I felt that living with others was a hindrance. I would sit
in my kuṭī and try to meditate and people would keep coming by for a
chat and disturbing me. I ran off to live by myself. I thought I
couldn’t practise with those people bothering me. I was fed up, so I
went to live in a small, deserted monastery in the forest, near a small
village. I stayed there alone, speaking to no-one because there was
nobody else to speak to.

After I’d been there about fifteen days the thought arose, ‘Hmm. It
would be good to have a novice or *pah-kow* here with me. He could help
me out with some small jobs.’ I knew it would come up, and sure enough,
there it was!

‘Hey! You’re a real character! You say you’re fed up with your friends,
fed up with your fellow monks and novices, and now you want a novice.
What’s this?’

‘No,’ it says, ‘I want a good novice.’

‘There! Where are all the good people, can you find any? Where are you
going to find a good person? In the whole monastery there were only
no-good people. You must have been the only good person, to have run
away like this!’

You have to follow it up like this, follow up the tracks of your
thoughts until you see.

‘Hmm. This is the important one. Where is there a good person to be
found? There aren’t any good people, you must find the good person
within yourself. If you are good in yourself then wherever you go will
be good. Whether others criticize or praise you, you are still good. If
you aren’t good, then when others criticize you, you get angry, and when
they praise you, you are pleased.

At that time I reflected on this and have found it to be true from that
day on until the present. Goodness must be found within. As soon as I
saw this, that feeling of wanting to run away disappeared. In later
times, whenever I had that desire arise I let it go. Whenever it arose I
was aware of it and kept my awareness on that. Thus I had a solid
foundation. Wherever I lived, whether people condemned me or whatever
they said, I would reflect that the point is not whether *they* were
good or bad. Good or evil must be seen within ourselves. The way other
people are, that’s their concern.

Don’t go thinking, ‘Oh, today is too hot,’ or, ‘Today is too cold,’ or,
‘Today is ….’ Whatever the day is like, that’s just the way it is.
Really, you are simply blaming the weather for your own laziness. We
must see the Dhamma within ourselves, then there is a surer kind of
peace.

So for all of you who have come to practise here, even though it’s only
for a few days, many things will arise. Many things may be arising which
you’re not even aware of. There is some right thinking, some wrong
thinking – many, many things. So I say this practice is difficult.

Even though some of you may experience some peace when you sit in
meditation, don’t be in a hurry to congratulate yourselves. Likewise, if
there is some confusion, don’t blame yourselves. If things seem to be
good, don’t delight in them, and if they’re not good don’t be averse to
them. Just look at it all, look at what you have. Just look, don’t
bother judging. If it’s good, don’t hold fast to it; if it’s bad, don’t
cling to it. Good and bad can both bite, so don’t hold fast to them.

The practice is simply to sit, sit and watch it all. Good moods and bad
moods come and go as is their nature. Don’t only praise your mind or
only condemn it, know the right time for these things. When it’s time
for congratulations, congratulate it, but just a little, don’t overdo
it. Just like teaching a child, sometimes you may have to spank it a
little. In our practice sometimes we may have to punish ourselves, but
don’t punish yourself all the time. If you punish yourself all the time,
in a while you’ll just give up the practice. But then you can’t just
give yourself a good time and take it easy either. That’s not the way to
practise. We practise according to the Middle Way. What is the Middle
Way? This Middle Way is difficult to follow, you can’t rely on your
moods and desires.

Don’t think that just sitting with your eyes closed is practise. If you
do think this way then quickly change your thinking! Steady practice is
having the attitude of practice while standing, walking, sitting and
lying down. When coming out of sitting meditation, reflect that you’re
simply changing postures. If you reflect in this way you will have
peace. Wherever you are, you will have this attitude of practice with
you constantly, you will have a steady awareness within yourself.

Those of you who, simply indulge in your moods, spending the whole day
letting the mind wander where it wants, will find that the next evening
in sitting meditation all you get is the ‘backwash’ from the day’s
aimless thinking. There is no foundation of calm because you have let it
go cold all day. If you practise like this, your mind gets gradually
further and further from the practice. When I ask some of my disciples,
‘How is your meditation going?’ They say, ‘Oh, it’s all gone now.’ You
see? They can keep it up for a month or two but in a year or two it’s
all finished.

Why is this? It’s because they don’t take this essential point into
their practice. When they’ve finished sitting they let go of their
samādhi. They start to sit for shorter and shorter periods, till they
reach the point where as soon as they start to sit they want to finish.
Eventually they don’t even sit. It’s the same with bowing to the Buddha
image. At first they make the effort to prostrate every night before
going to sleep, but after a while their minds begin to stray. Soon they
don’t bother to prostrate at all, they just nod, till eventually it’s
all gone. They throw out the practice completely.

Therefore, understand the importance of sati, practise constantly. Right
practice is steady practice. Whether standing, walking, sitting or
reclining, the practice must continue. This means that practice,
meditation, is done in the mind, not in the body. If our mind has zeal,
is conscientious and ardent, there will be awareness. The mind is the
important thing. The mind is that which supervises everything we do.

When we understand properly, we practise properly. When we practise
properly, we don’t go astray. Even if we only do a little, that is still
all right. For example, when you finish sitting in meditation, remind
yourselves that you are not actually finishing meditation, you are
simply changing postures. Your mind is still composed. Whether standing,
walking, sitting or reclining, you have sati with you. If you have this
kind of awareness you can maintain your internal practice. In the
evening when you sit again the practice continues uninterrupted. Your
effort is unbroken, allowing the mind to attain calm.

This is called steady practice. Whether we are talking or doing other
things we should try to make the practice continuous. If our mind has
recollection and self-awareness continuously, our practice will
naturally develop, it will gradually come together. The mind will find
peace, because it will know what is right and what is wrong. It will see
what is happening within us and realize peace.

If we are to develop sīla or samādhi, we must first have paññā. Some
people think that they’ll develop moral restraint one year, samādhi the
next year and the year after that they’ll develop wisdom. They think
these three things are separate. They think that this year they will
develop sīla, but if the mind is not firm (samādhi), how can they do it?
If there is no understanding (paññā), how can they do it? Without
samādhi or paññā, sīla will be sloppy.

In fact these three come together at the same point. When we have sīla
we have samādhi, when we have samādhi we have paññā. They are all one,
like a mango. Whether it’s small or fully grown, it’s still a mango.
When it’s ripe it’s still the same mango. If we think in simple terms
like this, we can see it more easily. We don’t have to learn a lot of
things, just know these things, know our practice.

When it comes to meditation some people don’t get what they want, so
they just give up, saying they don’t yet have the merit to practise
meditation. They can do bad things, they have that sort of talent, but
they don’t have the talent to do good. They give it up, saying they
don’t have a good enough foundation. This is the way people are, they
side with their defilements.

Now that you have this chance to practise, please understand that
whether you find it difficult or easy to develop samādhi it is entirely
up to you, not the samādhi. If it is difficult, it is because you are
practising wrongly. In our practice we must have ‘right view’
(*sammā-diṭṭhi*). If our view is right, everything else is right: right
view, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood,
right effort, right recollection, right concentration – the Eightfold
Path. When there is right view all the other factors will follow.

Whatever happens, don’t let your mind stray off the track. Look within
yourself and you will see clearly. As I see it, for the best practice,
it isn’t necessary to read many books. Take all the books and lock them
away. Just read your own mind. You have all been burying yourselves in
books from the time you entered school. I think that now you have this
opportunity and have the time, take the books, put them in a cupboard
and lock the door. Just read your mind.

Whenever something arises within the mind, whether you like it or not,
whether it seems right or wrong, just cut it off with, ‘this is not a
sure thing.’ Whatever arises just cut it down, ‘not sure, not sure.’
With just this single axe you can cut it all down. It’s all ‘not sure’.

For the duration of this next month that you will be staying in this
forest monastery, you should make a lot of headway. You will see the
truth. This ‘not sure’ is really an important one. This one develops
wisdom. The more you look, the more you will see ‘not sure-ness’. After
you’ve cut something off with ‘not sure’ it may come circling round and
pop up again. Yes, it’s truly ‘not sure’. Whatever pops up just stick
this one label on it all – ‘not sure’. You stick the sign on, ‘not
sure’, and in a while, when its turn comes, it crops up again, ‘Ah, not
sure.’ Dig here! Not sure. You will see this same old one who’s been
fooling you month in, month out, year in, year out, from the day you
were born. There’s only this one who’s been fooling you all along. See
this and realize the way things are.

When your practice reaches this point you won’t cling to sensations,
because they are all uncertain. Have you ever noticed? Maybe you see a
clock and think, ‘Oh, this is nice.’ Buy it and see – in not many days
you’re bored with it already. ‘This pen is really beautiful,’ so you
take the trouble to buy one. In not many months you tire of it. This is
how it is. Where is there any certainty?

If we see all these things as uncertain, their value fades away. All
things become insignificant. Why should we hold on to things that have
no value? We keep them only as we might keep an old rag to wipe our feet
with. We see all sensations as equal in value because they all have the
same nature.

When we understand sensations we understand the world. The world is
sensations and sensations are the world. If we aren’t fooled by
sensations, we aren’t fooled by the world. If we aren’t fooled by the
world, we aren’t fooled by sensations.

The mind which sees this will have a firm foundation of wisdom. Such a
mind will not have many problems. Any problems it does have, it can
solve. When there are no more problems there are no more doubts. Peace
arises in their stead. This is called ‘practice’. If we really practise
it must be like this.

[^1]: One of the many branch monasteries of Ajahn Chah’s main monastery,
    Wat Pah Pong.

[^2]: The play on words here between the Thai *‘patibat’* (practice) and
    *‘wibut’* (disaster) is lost in the English.

[^3]: These are the two extremes pointed out as wrong paths by the
    Buddha in his First Discourse. They are normally rendered as
    ‘indulgence in sense pleasures’ and ‘self-mortification’.
