The Flood of Sensuality
=======================

\<span class="dropcaps-first"\>K\</span\>\<span
class="dropcaps-words"\>āmogha\</span\>, the flood of sensuality: sunk
in sights, in sounds, in smells, in tastes, in bodily sensations. Sunk
because we only look at externals, we don’t look inwardly. People don’t
look at themselves, they only look at others. They can see everybody
else but they can’t see themselves. It’s not such a difficult thing to
do, but it’s just that people don’t really try.

For example, look at a beautiful woman. What does that do to you? As
soon as you see the face you see everything else. Do you see it? Just
look within your mind. What is it like to see a woman? As soon as the
eyes see just a little bit the mind sees all the rest. Why is it so
fast?

=1 It’s because you are sunk in the ‘water’. You are sunk, you think
about it, fantasize about it, are stuck in it. It’s just like being a
slave, somebody else has control over you. When they tell you to sit
you’ve got to sit, when they tell you to walk you’ve got to walk; you
can’t disobey them because you’re their slave. Being enslaved by the
senses is the same. No matter how hard you try you can’t seem to shake
it off. And if you expect others to do it for you, you really get into
trouble. You must shake it off for yourself.

Therefore, the Buddha left the practice of Dhamma, the transcendence of
suffering, up to us. Take for example. The Buddha was thoroughly
enlightened, so why didn’t he describe Nibbāna in detail? Why did he
only say that we should practise and find out for ourselves? Why is
that? Shouldn’t he have explained what Nibbāna is like?

‘The Buddha practised, developing the perfections over countless world
ages for the sake of all sentient beings, so why didn’t he point out
Nibbāna so that they all could see it and go there too?’ Some people
think like this. ‘If the Buddha really knew he would tell us. Why should
he keep anything hidden?’

Actually this sort of thinking is wrong. We can’t see the truth in that
way. We must practise, we must cultivate, in order to see. The Buddha
only pointed out the way to develop wisdom, that’s all. He said that we
ourselves must practise. Whoever practises will reach the goal.

But that path which the Buddha taught goes against our habits. We don’t
really like to be frugal, to be restrained so we say, ‘Show us the way,
show us the way to Nibbāna, so that those who like it easy like us can
go there too.’ It’s the same with wisdom. The Buddha can’t show you
wisdom, it’s not something that can be simply handed around. The Buddha
can show the way to develop wisdom, but whether one develops much or
only a little depends on the individual. Merit and accumulated virtues
of people naturally differ.

Just look at a material object, such as the wooden lions in front of the
hall here. People come and look at them and can’t seem to agree: one
person says, ‘Oh, how beautiful,’ while another says, ‘How revolting!’
It’s the one lion, both beautiful and ugly. Just this is enough to know
how things are.

Therefore the realization of Dhamma is sometimes slow, sometimes fast.
The Buddha and his disciples were all alike in that they had to practise
for themselves, but even so they still relied on teachers to advise them
and give them techniques in the practice.

Now, when we listen to Dhamma we may want to listen until all our doubts
are cleared up, but they’ll never be cleared up simply by listening.
Doubt is not overcome simply by listening or thinking, we must first
clean out the mind. To clean out the mind means to revise our practice.
No matter how long we were to listen to the teacher talk about the truth
we couldn’t know or see that truth just from listening. If we did, it
would be only through guesswork or conjecture.

However, even though simply listening to the Dhamma may not lead to
realization, it is beneficial. There were, in the Buddha’s time, those
who realized the Dhamma, even realizing the highest realization – –
while listening to a discourse. But those people were already highly
developed, their minds already understood to some extent. It’s like a
football. When a football is pumped up with air it expands. Now the air
in that football is all pushing to get out, but there’s no hole for it
to do so. As soon as a needle punctures the football the air comes
bursting out.

This is the same. The minds of those disciples who were enlightened
while listening to the Dhamma were like this. As long as there was no
catalyst to cause the reaction this ‘pressure’ was within them, like the
football. The mind was not yet free because of this very small thing
concealing the truth. As soon as they heard the Dhamma and it hit the
right spot, wisdom arose. They immediately understood, immediately let
go and realized the true Dhamma. That’s how it was. It was easy. The
mind uprighted itself. It changed, or turned, from one view to another.
You could say it was far, or you could say it was very near.

This is something we must do for ourselves. The Buddha was only able to
give techniques on how to develop wisdom, and so with the teachers these
days. They give Dhamma talks, they talk about the truth, but still we
can’t make that truth our own. Why not? There’s a ‘film’ obscuring it.
You could say that we are sunk, sunk in the water. – the ‘flood’ of
sensuality. – the ‘flood’ of becoming.

‘Becoming’ () means ‘the sphere of birth’. Sensual desire is born at the
sights, sounds, tastes, smells, feelings and thoughts, with which we
identify. The mind holds fast and is stuck to sensuality.

Some cultivators get bored, fed up, tired of the practice and are lazy.
You don’t have to look very far, just look at how people can’t seem to
keep the Dhamma in mind, and yet if they get scolded they’ll hold on to
it for ages. They may get scolded at the beginning of the Rains, and
even after the Rains Retreat has ended they still haven’t forgotten it.
They won’t forget it their whole lives if it goes down deep enough.

But when it comes to the Buddha’s teaching, telling us to be moderate,
to be restrained, to practise conscientiously – why don’t people take
these things to their hearts? Why do they keep forgetting these things?
You don’t have to look very far, just look at our practice here. For
example, establishing standards, such as, after the meal not chattering
while washing your bowls! Even this much seems to be beyond people. Even
though we know that chattering is not particularly useful and binds us
to sensuality, people still like talking. Pretty soon they start to
disagree and eventually get into arguments and squabbles. There’s
nothing more to it than this.

Now this isn’t anything subtle or refined, it’s pretty basic, and yet
people don’t seem to really make much effort with it. They say they want
to see the Dhamma, but they want to see it on their own terms, they
don’t want to follow the path of practice. That’s as far as they go. All
these standards of practice are skilful means for penetrating and seeing
the Dhamma, but people don’t practise accordingly.

To say ‘real practice’ or ‘ardent practice’ doesn’t necessarily mean you
have to expend a whole lot of energy – just put some effort into the
mind, making some effort with all the feelings that arise, especially
those which are steeped in sensuality. These are our enemies.

But people can’t seem to do it. Every year, as the end of the Rains
Retreat approaches, it gets worse and worse. Some of the monks have
reached the limit of their endurance, the ‘end of their tether’. The
closer we get to the end of the Rains the worse they get, they have no
consistency in their practice. I speak about this every year and yet
people can’t seem to remember it. We establish a certain standard and in
not even a year it’s fallen apart. It starts when the retreat is almost
finished – the chatter, the socializing and everything else. The
practice all goes to pieces. This is how it tends to be.

Those who are really interested in the practice should consider why this
is so: it’s because people don’t see the adverse results of these
things.

When we are accepted into the Buddhist monkhood we live simply. And yet
some disrobe to go to the front, where the bullets fly past them every
day – they prefer it like that. They really want to go. Danger surrounds
them on all sides and yet they’re prepared to go. Why don’t they see the
danger? They’re prepared to die by the gun but nobody wants to die
developing virtue. Just seeing this is enough. It’s because they’re
slaves, nothing else. See this much and you know what it’s all about.
People don’t see the danger.

This is really amazing, isn’t it? You’d think they could see it but they
can’t. If they can’t see it even then, then there’s no way they can get
out. They’re determined to whirl around in This is how things are. Just
talking about simple things like this we can begin to understand.

If you were to ask them, ‘Why were you born?’ they’d probably have a lot
of trouble answering, because they can’t see it. They’re sunk in the
world of the senses and sunk in becoming ().[^1] is the sphere of birth,
our birthplace. To put it simply, beings are born from – it is the
preliminary condition for birth. Wherever birth takes place, that’s .

For example, suppose we had an orchard of apple trees that we were
particularly fond of. That’s a for us if we don’t reflect with wisdom.
How so? Suppose our orchard contained a hundred or a thousand apple
trees – it doesn’t really matter what kind of trees they are, just so
long as we consider them to be ‘our own’ trees. Then we are going to be
‘born’ as a ‘worm’ in every single one of those trees. We bore into
every one, even though our human body is still back there in the house,
we send out ‘tentacles’ into every one of those trees.

Now, how do we know that it’s a ? It’s a (sphere of existence) because
of our clinging to the idea that those trees are our own, that that
orchard is our own. If someone were to take an axe and cut one of the
trees down, the owner over there in the house ‘dies’ along with the
tree. He gets furious, and has to go and set things right, to fight and
maybe even kill over it. That quarrelling is the ‘birth’. The ‘sphere of
birth’ is the orchard of trees that we cling to as our own. We are
‘born’ right at the point where we consider them to be our own, born
from that . Even if we had a thousand apple trees, if someone were to
cut down just one it would be like cutting the owner down.

Whatever we cling to, we are born right there, we exist right there. We
are born as soon as we ‘know’. This is knowing through not-knowing: we
know that someone has cut down one of our trees. But we don’t know that
those trees are not really ours. This is called ‘knowing through
not-knowing’. We are bound to be born into that .

the wheel of conditioned existence, operates like this. People cling to
, they depend on . If they cherish , this is birth. And if they fall
into suffering over that same thing, this is also a birth. As long as we
can’t let go we are stuck in the rut of saṃsāra, spinning around like a
wheel. Look into this, contemplate it. Whatever we cling to as being us
or ours, that is a place for birth.

There must be a , a sphere of birth, before birth can take place.
Therefore, the Buddha said, whatever you have, don’t ‘have’ it. Let it
be there but don’t make it yours. You must understand this ‘having’ and
‘not having’, know the truth of them, don’t flounder in suffering.

The place that we were born from; you want to go back there and be born
again, don’t you? All of you monks and novices, do you know where you
were born from? You want to go back there, don’t you? Right there, look
into this. All of you getting ready. The nearer we get to the end of the
retreat, the more you start preparing to go back and be born there.

Really, you’d think that people could appreciate what it would be like,
living in a person’s belly. How uncomfortable would that be? Just look,
merely staying in your for one day is enough. Shut all the doors and
windows and you’re suffocating already. How would it be to lie in a
person’s belly for nine or ten months? Think about it.

People don’t see the liability of things. Ask them why they are living,
or why they are born, and they have no idea. Do you still want to get
back in there? Why? It should be obvious but you don’t see it. Why can’t
you see it? What are you stuck on, what are you holding on to? Think it
out for yourself.

It’s because there is a cause for becoming and birth. Just take a look
at the preserved baby in the main hall, have you seen it? Isn’t anybody
alarmed by it? No, no one’s alarmed by it. A baby lying in its mother’s
belly is just like that preserved baby. And yet you want to make more of
those things, and even want to get back and soak in there yourself. Why
don’t you see the danger of it and the benefit of the practice?

You see? That’s . The root is right there, it revolves around that. The
Buddha taught to contemplate this point. People think about it but still
don’t see. They’re all getting ready to go back there again. They know
that it wouldn’t be very comfortable in there, to put their necks in the
noose is really uncomfortable, yet they still want to lay their heads in
there. Why don’t they understand this? This is where wisdom comes in,
where we must contemplate.

When I talk like this people say, ‘If that’s the case then everybody
would have to become monks, and then how would the world be able to
function?’ You’ll never get everybody to become monks, so don’t worry.
The world is here because of deluded beings, so this is no trifling
matter.

I first became a novice at the age of nine. I started practising from
way back then. But in those days I didn’t really know what it was all
about. I found out when I became a monk. Once I became a monk I became
so wary. The sensual pleasures people indulged in didn’t seem like so
much fun to me. I saw the suffering in them. It was like seeing a
delicious banana which I knew was very sweet but which I also knew to be
poisoned. No matter how sweet or tempting it was, if I ate it I would
die. I considered in this way every time; every time I wanted to ‘eat a
banana’ I would see the ‘poison’ steeped inside, and so eventually I
could withdraw my interest from those things. Now at this age, such
things are not at all tempting.

Some people don’t see the ‘poison’; some see it but still want to try
their luck. ‘If your hand is wounded don’t touch poison, it may seep
into the wound.’

I used to consider trying it out as well. When I had lived as a monk for
five or six years, I thought of the Buddha. He practised for five or six
years and was finished, but I was still interested in the worldly life,
so I thought of going back to it: ‘Maybe I should go and ‘build the
world’ for a while, I would gain some experience and learning. Even the
Buddha had his son, Rāhula. Maybe I’m being too strict?’

I sat and considered this for some time, until I realized: ‘Yes, well,
that’s all very fine, but I’m just afraid that this “Buddha” won’t be
like the last one.’ A voice in me said, ‘I’m afraid this “Buddha” will
just sink into the mud, not like the last one.’ And so I resisted those
worldly thoughts.

From my sixth or seventh Rains Retreat up until the twentieth, I really
had to put up a fight. These days I seem to have run out of bullets,
because I’ve been shooting for a long time. I’m just afraid that you
younger monks and novices have still got so much ammunition, you may
just want to go and try out your guns. Before you do, consider carefully
first.

It’s hard to give up sensual desire. It’s really difficult to see it as
it is. We must use skilful means. Consider sensual pleasures as like
eating meat which gets stuck in your teeth. Before you finish the meal
you have to find a toothpick to pry it out. When the meat comes out you
feel some relief for a while, maybe you even think that you won’t eat
anymore meat. But when you see it again you can’t resist it. You eat
some more and then it gets stuck again. When it gets stuck you have to
pick it out again, which gives some relief once more, until you eat some
more meat. That’s all there is to it. Sensual pleasures are just like
this, no better than this. When the meat gets stuck in your teeth
there’s discomfort. You take a toothpick and pick it out and experience
some relief. There’s nothing more to it than this sensual desire. The
pressure builds up and up until you let a little bit out. Oh! That’s all
there is to it. I don’t know what all the fuss is about.

I didn’t learn these things from anybody else, they occurred to me in
the course of my practice. I would sit in meditation and reflect on
sensual pleasure as being like a red ants’ nest.[^2] Someone takes a
piece of wood and pokes the nest until the ants come running out,
crawling down the wood and into their faces, biting their eyes and ears.
And yet they still don’t see the difficulty they are in.

However, it’s not beyond our ability. In the teaching of the Buddha it
is said that if we’ve seen the harm of something, no matter how good it
may seem to be, we know that it’s harmful. Whatever we haven’t yet seen
the harm of, we just think it’s good. If we haven’t yet seen the harm of
anything we can’t get out of it.

Have you noticed? No matter how dirty it may be people like it. This
kind of ‘work’ isn’t clean but you don’t even have to pay people to do
it, they’ll gladly volunteer. With other kinds of dirty work, even if
you pay a good wage people won’t do it, but this kind of work they
submit themselves to gladly, you don’t even have to pay them. It’s not
that it’s clean work, either, it’s dirty work. Yet why do people like
it? How can you say that people are intelligent when they behave like
this? Think about it.

Have you ever noticed the dogs in the monastery grounds here? There are
packs of them. They run around biting each other, some of them even
getting maimed. In another month or so they’ll be at it. As soon as one
of the smaller ones gets into the pack the bigger ones are at him – out
he comes yelping, dragging his leg behind him. But when the pack runs on
he hobbles on after it. He’s only a little one, but he thinks he’ll get
his chance one day. They bite his leg for him and that’s all he gets for
his trouble. For the whole of the mating season he may not even get one
chance. You can see this for yourself in the monastery here.

When these dogs run around howling in packs, I figure if they were
humans they’d be singing songs! They think it’s such great fun they’re
singing songs, but they don’t have a clue what it is that makes them do
it, they just blindly follow their instincts.

Think about this carefully. If you really want to practise you should
understand your feelings. For example, among the monks, novices or
laypeople, who should you socialize with? If you associate with people
who talk a lot they induce you to talk a lot also. Your own share is
already enough, theirs is even more; put them together and they explode!

People like to socialize with those who chatter a lot and talk of
frivolous things. They can sit and listen to that for hours. When it
comes to listening to Dhamma, talking about practice, there isn’t much
of it to be heard. Like when giving a Dhamma talk: as soon as I start
off ‘[^3] they’re all sleepy already. They don’t take in the talk at
all. When I reach the ‘’ they all open their eyes and wake up. Every
time there’s a Dhamma talk people fall asleep. How are they going to get
any benefit from it?

Real Dhamma cultivators will come away from a talk feeling inspired and
uplifted, they learn something. Every six or seven days the teacher
gives another talk, constantly boosting the practice.

This is your chance, now that you are ordained. There’s only this one
chance, so take a close look. Look at things and consider which path you
will choose. You are independent now. Where are you going to go from
here? You are standing at the crossroads between the worldly way and the
Dhamma way. Which way will you choose? You can take either way, this is
the time to decide. The choice is yours to make. If you are to be
liberated it is at this point.

[^1]: The Thai word for , ‘*pop*’, would have been a familiar term to
    Ajahn Chah’s audience. It is generally understood to mean ‘sphere of
    rebirth’. Ajahn Chah’s usage of the word here is somewhat
    unconventional, emphasizing a more practical application of the
    term.

[^2]: Both the red ants and their eggs are used for food in North-East
    Thailand, so such raids on their nests were not so unusual.

[^3]: The first line of the traditional *Pāli* words of homage to the
    Buddha, recited before giving a formal Dhamma talk. is the
    traditional *Pāli* word for ending a talk.
