A Note on the Text
==================

\<span class="dropcaps-first"\>T\</span\>\<span
class="dropcaps-words"\>his is\</span\> the single volume edition of .
These have all been transcribed, translated and edited from talks
originally given in the Thai or Laotian language by Ajahn Chah. Some
were given to gatherings of lay followers; many, perhaps most, were
offered to groups of mainly male monastics living with him in Thailand.
These factors inevitably affect not just the content but also the tone
and emphasise of the original teachings. Readers are encouraged to bear
these circumstances in mind in order to appreciate fully the range and
applicability and the full significance of these Dhamma teachings. In a
way, Western lay readers will need to make their own inner translation
as they go along – finding their own equivalents for all those water
buffalo analogies and the context of an ascetic monastic life in the
forest – but this kind of engaged reflection, contemplating how these
words apply within the ambit of our own lives, is exactly the kind of
relationship to the teachings that Ajahn Chah encouraged.

Firstly, amongst these influencing factors there are the inherent
difficulties in translating from Thai to English, from a tonal Asian
language deeply influenced by Buddhism to a European language with its
own cultural resonances. Additionally, several different translators
have worked on the teachings gathered in these volumes. The differing
nationalities and backgrounds of these translators inevitably mean that
there are variations in tone, style and vocabulary between chapters.

Secondly, during the thirty-year period during which these translations
were made, Buddhist culture in the West has also greatly changed.
Whereas earlier translators perhaps felt that many Buddhist concepts
needed to be translated into more familiar Western terms, there is
nowadays a greater awareness of the Buddhist worldview; for example,
terms like ‘kamma’ and ‘Nibbāna’ are now part of accepted English
vocabulary. The talks gathered in these volumes therefore show a range
of ways of translating Buddhist terms and concepts.

Thirdly, the monastic Buddhist context means that Thai and Pāḷi words
with technical meanings were a regular and accepted part of the
vernacular teaching style. The various translators have each made their
own decisions about how to render such technical terms. For example, in
the Thai language the same word can mean either ‘heart’ or ‘mind’, and
translators have had to exercize their own judgement as to how to render
it into English. Readers should bear this in mind if they encounter
English words used in ways that don’t seem quite natural, or seem
inconsistent between the various talks. More often than not non-English
words are explained either in the context of the talk or with a
footnote. In addition, a glossary of the more common terms and a list of
further resources can be found at the end of the book.

We trust that in our efforts to render oral instruction in a written
form we have not obscured the intentions of the teacher. Inevitably some
compromises have been made, as different translators have attempted to
strike a balance between literal and liberal renderings. For this
compilation we have reedited some of the translations for the sake of
standardizing terms and style. However we have kept this to a minimum.
Further editions of these works might attempt a greater degree of
standardization.

Finally, in talks on renunciant practice, Ajahn Chah’s teachings were
given in a context where the audience was mainly engaged in a celibate
lifestyle. This circumstance inevitably colours much of the way the
Dhamma is presented there. Ajahn Chah also very often talked only to
men. This fact explains the constant use of exclusively male pronouns in
many of these talks. Although the preservation of such language here may
appear to some as an obstruction, it seemed an inappropriate liberty to
edit it out. Readers may thus again at times have to make an internal
translation of their own, or other leaps of the imagination, in order to
illuminate the relevance of those teachings to their own lives.

The preparation and presentation of this compilation has been a team
effort benefiting from the time and skills of many – proof-readers,
technicians and designers. Particular mention should be made of the
offerings of two of the original translators, Paul Breiter and Bruce
Evans. We are indebted to all those contributors whose time and effort
have brought this project to fruition.

We sincerely hope that with all these perspectives taken to heart, the
words contained in this book of collected teachings will serve every
reader well and be a condition for the realization of Nibbāna. It was
with this same intention that Ajahn Chah spoke so much for so many
years. May these intentions ripen in the reader’s life and lead to
complete peace and freedom.

The compilers
