Introduction
============

The Thai Forest Tradition
-------------------------

<span class="dropcaps-first" markdown="1">T</span><span
class="dropcaps-words" markdown="1">he Venerable Ajahn
Chah</span>&nbsp; often reminded his disciples that the Buddha was
born in a forest, was enlightened in a forest and passed away in a
forest. Ajahn Chah lived nearly all his adult life following a style of
Buddhist practice known these days as the Thai Forest Tradition, a
tradition which adheres to the spirit of the way espoused by the Buddha
himself, and practises according to the same standards the Buddha
encouraged during his lifetime.

This lineage is a branch of the Southern School of Buddhism, originally
known as the *Sthaviras* (in Sanskrit) or *Theras* (in Pāḷi), later
referred to as the Theravāda school. ‘Theravāda’ means ‘The Way of the
Elders’, and that has been their abiding theme ever since. The ethos of
the tradition can be characterized as something like: ‘That’s the way
the Buddha established it so that is the way we’ll do it.’ It has thus
always had a particularly conservative quality to it.

From its origins, and particularly as the main religion of Sri Lanka,
Theravāda Buddhism has been maintained and continually restored over the
years, eventually spreading through South-East Asia and latterly from
those countries to the West. As the religion became established in these
geographical regions, respect and reverence for the original Teachings
have remained, with a respect for the style of life as embodied by the
Buddha and the original Saṅgha, the forest-dwelling monastics of the
earliest times. This is the model that was employed then and is carried
on today.

There have been ups and downs throughout its history; it would develop,
get rich, become corrupt and collapse under its own weight. Then a
splinter group would appear and go off into the forest in order to
return to those original standards of keeping the monastic rules,
practising meditation and studying the original Teachings. This is a
pattern that has been maintained over the many centuries.

In more recent times, in mid 19^th^ century Thailand, the orthodox
position held by scholars was that it was not possible to realize
Nibbāna in this age, nor to attain *jhāna* (meditative absorption). This
was something that the revivers of the Forest Tradition refused to
accept. It was also one of the reasons for which they were deemed, by
the ecclesiastical hierarchy of the time, to be mavericks and
trouble-makers, and it lies behind the obvious distance many of them
(Ajahn Chah included) kept from the majority of ‘study’ monks of their
own Theravāda lineage – as well as their refrain that you don’t get
wisdom from the books.

One might find such sentiments presumptuous or arrogant, unless it is
appreciated that the interpretations of scholars were leading Buddhism
into a black hole. Thai Forest monastics had the determination to focus
on the lifestyle and on personal experience rather than on book study
(especially the commentaries). In short, it was just the kind of
situation that made the spiritual landscape ripe for renewal, and it was
out of this fertile ground that the revival of the Forest Tradition
emerged.

AJAHN MUN
---------

The Thai Forest Tradition would not exist as it does today were it not
for the influence of one particular great master, Ajahn Mun. Venerable
Ajahn Mun Bhuridatta was born in Ubon Province in the 1870s. After his
ordination as a bhikkhu he sought out Ven. Ajahn Sao, one of the rare
local forest monks, and asked him to teach him meditation; he had also
recognized that a rigorous adherence to the monastic discipline would be
crucial to his spiritual progress.

Though both of these elements (i.e. meditation and strict discipline)
might seem unremarkable from the vantage point of the present day, at
that time monastic discipline had grown extremely lax throughout the
region and meditation was looked upon with great suspicion. In time
Ajahn Mun successfully explained and demonstrated the usefulness of
meditation and became an exemplar of a much higher standard of conduct
for the monastic community.

He became the most highly regarded of spiritual teachers in his country
and almost all of the most accomplished and revered meditation masters
of the 20^th^ century in Thailand were either his direct disciples or
were deeply influenced by him. Ajahn Chah was among them.

AJAHN CHAH
----------

Ajahn Chah was born in a village in Ubon Province, North-East Thailand.
At the age of nine he went to live in the local monastery. He was
ordained as a novice, and at the age of twenty took higher ordination.
He studied basic Dhamma, the Discipline and other scriptures, and later
became a wandering *tudong* bhikkhu. He travelled for a number of years
in the style of an ascetic bhikkhu, sleeping in forests, caves and
cremation grounds, and spent a short but enlightening period with Ajahn
Mun himself.

In 1954 he was invited to settle in a forest near Bahn Gor, the village
of his birth. The forest was uninhabited and known as a place of cobras,
tigers and ghosts. More and more bhikkhus, nuns and lay-people came to
hear his teachings and stay on to practise with him, and as time went
by, a large monastery formed and was given the name Wat Pah Pong. There
are now disciples of Ajahn Chah living, practising meditation and
teaching in more than 300 mountain and forest branch monasteries
throughout Thailand and the West.

Although Ajahn Chah passed away in 1992, the training that he
established is still carried on at Wat Pah Pong and its branches. There
is usually group meditation twice a day and sometimes a talk by the
senior teacher, but the heart of the meditation is the way of life. The
monastics do manual work, dye and sew their own robes, make most of
their own requisites and keep the monastery buildings and grounds in
immaculate shape. They live extremely simply, following the ascetic
precepts of eating once a day from the alms bowl and limiting their
possessions and robes. Scattered throughout the forest are individual
huts where bhikkhus and nuns live and meditate in solitude, and where
they practise walking meditation on cleared paths under the trees.

In some of the monasteries in the West, and a few in Thailand, the
physical location of the centre dictates that there might be some small
variations to this style – for instance, the monastery in Switzerland is
situated in a old wooden hotel building at the edge of a mountain
village – however, regardless of such differences, the same spirit of
simplicity, quietude and scrupulosity sets the abiding tone. Discipline
is maintained strictly, enabling one to lead a simple and pure life in a
harmoniously regulated community where virtue, meditation and
understanding may be skilfully and continuously cultivated.

Along with monastic life as it is lived within the bounds of fixed
locations, the practice of *tudong* – wandering on foot through the
countryside, on pilgrimage or in search of quiet places for solitary
retreat – is still considered a central part of spiritual training. Even
though the forests have been disappearing rapidly throughout Thailand,
and the tigers and other wild creatures so often encountered during such
*tudong* journeys in the past have been depleted almost to the point of
extinction, it has still been possible for this way of life and practice
to continue. Indeed, not only has this practice of wandering on foot
been maintained by Ajahn Chah, his disciples and many other forest
monastics in Thailand; it has also been sustained by his monks and nuns
in many countries of the West. In these situations the strict standards
of conduct are still maintained: living only on almsfood freely offered
by local people, eating only between dawn and noon, not carrying or
using money, sleeping wherever shelter can be found. Wisdom is a way of
living and being, and Ajahn Chah endeavoured to preserve the simple
monastic life-style in all its dimensions, in order that people may
study and practise Dhamma in the present day.

AJAHN CHAH’S TEACHING OF WESTERNERS
-----------------------------------

From the beginning Ajahn Chah chose not to give any special treatment to
the *farang* (Western) monks who came to study with him, but to let them
adapt to the climate, food and culture as best they could, and use the
experience of discomfort for the development of wisdom and patient
endurance. In 1975 Wat Pah Nanachat (the International Forest Monastery)
was established near Wat Pah Pong as a place for Westerners to practise.
The people of Bung Wai village had been long-standing disciples of Ajahn
Chah and asked him if the foreign monks could settle there and start a
new monastery. Then in 1976 Ajahn Sumedho was invited by a group in
London to come and establish a Theravādan monastery in England. Ajahn
Chah came over the following year and left Ajahn Sumedho and a small
group of monastics at the Hampstead Buddhist Vihāra, a town house on a
busy street in North London. Within a few years they had moved to the
country and several different branch monasteries had been established.
Other monasteries were set up in France, Australia, New Zealand,
Switzerland, Italy, Canada and the U.S.A. Ajahn Chah himself travelled
twice to Europe and North America, in 1977 and 1979.

He once said that Buddhism in Thailand was like an old tree that had
formerly been vigorous and abundant; now it was so aged that it could
only produce a few fruits and they were small and bitter. Buddhism in
the West he likened in contrast to a young sapling, full of youthful
energy and the potential for growth, but needing proper care and support
for its development.

The Four Noble Truths
---------------------

All the Teachings can be said to derive from an essential matrix of
insight: *The Setting in Motion of the Wheel of Truth*
(*Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta*, SN 56.11). In this brief discourse the
Buddha speaks about the nature of the Middle Way and the Four Noble
Truths. It takes only twenty minutes to recite, and the structures and
forms he used to express this teaching were familiar to people in his
time.

The Four Noble Truths are formulated like a medical diagnosis in the
*ayurvedic*[^1] tradition:

1.  the symptom

2.  the cause

3.  the prognosis

4.  the cure

The First Truth is the ‘symptom’. There is *dukkha* – we experience
incompleteness, dissatisfaction or suffering. There might be periods of
a coarse or even a transcendent happiness, but there are also feelings
of discontent which can vary from extreme anguish to the faintest sense
that some blissful feeling we are experiencing will not last. All of
this comes under the heading of ‘*dukkha*’. This First Truth is often
wrongly understood as: ‘Reality in every dimension is *dukkha*’. That’s
not what is meant here. If it were, there would be no hope of liberation
for anyone, and to realize the truth of the way things are would not
result in abiding peace and happiness. These are *noble* truths in the
sense that they are relative truths; what makes them noble is that, when
they are understood, they lead us to a realization of the Ultimate.

The Second Noble Truth is the ‘cause’. Self-centred craving, *taṇhā* in
Pāḷi means ‘thirst’. This craving, this grasping, is the cause of
*dukkha*. There are many subtle dimensions to it: craving for
sense-pleasure; craving to become something or craving to be identified
as something; it can also be craving not to be, the desire to disappear,
to be annihilated, the desire to get rid of.

The Third Truth is the ‘prognosis’. Cessation: *dukkha-nirodha*. The
experience of *dukkha*, of incompleteness, can fade away, can be
transcended. It can end. Dukkha is not an absolute reality, it’s just a
temporary experience from which the heart can be liberated.

The Fourth Noble Truth is the ‘cure’. It is the Path; it is how we get
from the Second Truth to the Third, from the causation of *dukkha* to
the ending of it. The cure is the Eightfold Path: virtue, concentration
and wisdom.

The Law of Kamma
----------------

The Buddha’s insight into the nature of Reality led him to see that this
is a moral universe: good actions reap pleasant results, harmful acts
reap painful results. The results may come soon after the act or at some
remote time in the future, but an effect which matches the cause will
necessarily follow. The key element of *kamma* is intention. As the
Buddha expresses it in the opening verses of the Dhammapada:

> ‘Mind is the forerunner of all things: think and act with a corrupt
> heart and sorrow will follow one as surely as the cart follows the ox
> that pulls it.’

> ‘Mind is the forerunner of all things: think and act with a pure heart
> and happiness will follow one as surely as one’s never-departing
> shadow.’
>
> *(Dhp 1-2)*

This understanding is something that one comes to recognize through
experience, and reference to it will be found throughout the Dhamma
talks in these pages. When Ajahn Chah encountered westerners who said
that they didn’t believe in *kamma* as he described it, rather than
dismissing it as wrong view, he was interested that they could look at
things in such a different way – he would ask them to describe how they
saw things working, and then take the conversation from there. The story
is widely circulated that when a young Western monk told Ajahn Chah he
couldn’t go along with the teachings on rebirth, Ajahn Chah answered him
by saying that that didn’t have to be a problem, but to come back in
five years to talk about it again.

Everything is Uncertain
-----------------------

Insight can truly be said to have dawned when three qualities have been
seen and known through direct experience. These are *anicca, dukkha* and
*anattā* – impermanence, unsatisfactoriness and ‘not-self’. We recognize
that everything is changing, nothing can be permanently satisfying or
dependable, and nothing can truly be said to be ours, or absolutely who
and what we are. Ajahn Chah stressed that the contemplation of *anicca*
is the gateway to wisdom. As he puts it in the talk ‘Still, Flowing
Water’; ‘Whoever sees the uncertainty of things sees the unchanging
reality of them … If you know *anicca*, uncertainty, you will let go of
things and not grasp onto them.’

It is a characteristic of Ajahn Chah’s teaching that he used the less
familiar rendition of ‘uncertainty’ (*my naer* in Thai) for *anicca*.
While ‘impermanence’ can have a more abstract or technical tone to it,
‘uncertainty’ better describes the feeling in the heart when one is
faced with that quality of change.

Choice of Expression: ‘yes’ or ‘no’
-----------------------------------

A characteristic of the Theravāda teachings is that the Truth and the
way leading to it are often indicated by talking about what they are
*not* rather than what they *are*.

Readers have often mistaken this for a nihilistic view of life, and if
one comes from a culture committed to expressions of life-affirmation,
it’s easy to see how the mistake could be made.

The Buddha realized that the mere declaration of the Truth did not
necessarily arouse faith, and might not be effective in communicating it
to others either, so he adopted a much more analytical method
(*vibhajjavāda* in Pāḷi) and in doing so composed the formula of the
Four Noble Truths. This analytical method through negation is most
clearly seen in the Buddha’s second discourse (*Anattalakkhana Sutta*,
SN 22.59), where it is shown how a ‘self’ cannot be found in relation to
any of the factors of body or mind, therefore: ‘The wise noble disciple
becomes dispassionate towards the body, feelings, perceptions, mental
formations and consciousness.’ Thus the heart is liberated.

Once we let go of what we’re not, the nature of what is Real becomes
apparent. And as that Reality is beyond description, it is most
appropriate, and least misleading, to leave it undescribed – this is the
essence of the ‘way of negation’.

Ajahn Chah avoided talking about levels of attainment and levels of
meditative absorption in order to counter spiritual materialism (the
gaining mind, competitiveness and jealousy) and to keep people focused
on the Path. Having said that, he was also ready to speak about Ultimate
Reality if required. The talks ‘Toward the Unconditioned,’
‘Transcendence’ and ‘No Abiding’ are examples of this. If, however, a
person insisted on asking about transcendent qualities and it was clear
that their understanding was not yet developed (as in the dialogue ‘What
is Contemplation’), Ajahn Chah might well respond, as he does there, ‘It
isn’t anything and we don’t call it anything – that’s all there is to
it! Be finished with all of it’, (literally: ‘If there is anything
there, then just throw it to the dogs!’)

Right View and Virtue
---------------------

Ajahn Chah frequently said that his experience had shown him that all
spiritual progress depended upon Right View and on purity of conduct. Of
Right View the Buddha once said: ‘Just as the glowing of the dawn sky
foretells the rising of the sun, so too is Right View the forerunner of
all wholesome states’ (AN 10.121). To establish Right View means firstly
that one has a trustworthy map of the terrain of the mind and the world
– an appreciation of the law of *kamma*, particularly – and secondly it
means that one sees experience in the light of the Four Noble Truths and
is thus turning that flow of perceptions, thoughts and moods into fuel
for insight. The four points become the quarters of the compass by which
we orient our understanding and thus guide our actions and intentions.

Ajahn Chah saw *sīla* (virtue) as the great protector of the heart and
encouraged a sincere commitment to the Precepts by all those who were
serious about their search for happiness and a skilfully lived life –
whether these were the Five Precepts of the householder or the Eight,
Ten or 227 of the various levels of the monastic community. Virtuous
action and speech, *sīla*, brings the heart directly into accord with
Dhamma and thus becomes the foundation for concentration, insight and,
finally, liberation.

In many ways *sīla* is the external corollary to the internal quality of
Right View and there is a reciprocal relationship between them: if we
understand causality and see the relationship between craving and
*dukkha*, then certainly our actions are more likely to be harmonious
and restrained; similarly, if our actions and speech are respectful,
honest and non-violent, we create the causes of peace within us and it
will be much easier for us to see the laws governing the mind and its
workings, and Right View will develop more easily.

One particular outcome of this relationship of which Ajahn Chah spoke
regularly, as in the talk ‘Convention and Liberation’, is the intrinsic
emptiness of all conventions (e.g. money, monasticism, social customs),
but the simultaneous need to respect them fully. This might sound
paradoxical, but he saw the Middle Way as synonymous with the resolution
of this kind of conundrum. As he once said, ‘The Dhamma is all about
letting go; the monastic discipline is all about holding on; when you
realize how those two function together, you will be fine.’ If we cling
to conventions we become burdened and limited by them, but if we try to
defy them or negate them we find ourselves lost, conflicted and
bewildered. He saw that with the right attitude, both aspects could be
respected and in a way that was natural and freeing rather than forced
or compromised.

It was probably due to his own profound insights in this area that he
was able to be both extraordinarily orthodox and austere as a Buddhist
monk, yet utterly relaxed and unfettered by any of the rules he
observed. To many who met him he seemed the happiest man in the world –
a fact perhaps ironic about someone who had never had sex in his life,
had no money, never listened to music, was regularly available to people
eighteen to twenty hours a day, slept on a thin grass mat, had a
diabetic condition and various forms of malaria, and who was delighted
by the fact that Wat Pah Pong had the reputation of having ‘the worst
food in the world.’

Methods of Training
-------------------

The collection of Ajahn Chah’s talks presented here was transcribed from
tapes made more often than not in informal dialogues, where the flow of
teaching and to whom it was directed were extremely unpredictable. Some
of the talks were given in such spontaneous gatherings, others on more
formal occasions, such as after the recitation of the bhikkhus’ rules,
or to the whole assembly of laity and monastics on the weekly lunar
observance night. However, whether they were of the former or the latter
kind, Ajahn Chah never planned anything. Not one single part of the
Dhamma teachings printed here was plotted out before he started
speaking. This was an important principle, he felt, as the job of the
teacher was to get out of the way and let the Dhamma arise according to
the needs of the moment – if it’s not alive to the present, it’s not
Dhamma, he would say. This style of teaching was not unique to Ajahn
Chah, but is that espoused throughout the Thai Forest Tradition.

Ajahn Chah trained his students in many ways, the majority of the
learning process occurring through situational teaching. He knew that,
for the heart to learn any aspect of the Teaching truly and be
transformed by it, the lesson had to be absorbed by experience, not
intellectually alone. Thus he employed aspects of the monastic routine,
communal living and the *tudong* life as ways to teach: community work
projects, learning to recite the rules, helping with the daily chores,
random changes in the schedule – these were all used as a forum in which
to investigate the arising of *dukkha* and the way leading to its
cessation.

He encouraged the attitude of being ready to learn from everything, as
he describes in the talk ‘Dhamma Nature’. He would emphasize that we are
our own teachers: if we are wise, every personal problem, event and
aspect of nature will instruct us; if we are foolish, not even having
the Buddha before us explaining everything would make any real
impression.

This insight became clear in the way he related to people’s questions –
rather than answering the question in its own terms, he responded more
to where the questioner was coming from. Often when asked something he
would appear to receive the question, gently take it to pieces and then
hand the bits back to those who asked; they would then see for
themselves how it was put together. To their surprise he had guided them
in such a way that they had answered their own question. When asked how
it was that he could do this so often, he replied ‘If the person did not
already know the answer they could not have posed the question in the
first place.’

Other key attitudes that he encouraged and which can be found in the
teachings here are, firstly, the need to cultivate a profound sense of
urgency in meditation practice and, secondly, to use the training
environment to develop patient endurance. This latter quality is seen in
the forest life as almost synonymous with spiritual training, but has
not otherwise received a great deal of attention in spiritual circles of
the ‘quick fix’ culture of the West.

When the Buddha was giving his very first instructions on monastic
discipline, to a spontaneous gathering of 1,250 of his enlightened
disciples at the Bamboo Grove, his first words were: ‘Patient endurance
is the supreme practice for freeing the heart from unwholesome states.’
(Dhp 183-85). So when someone would come to Ajahn Chah with a tale of
woe, of how her husband was drinking and the rice crop looked bad this
year, his first response would often be: ‘Can you endure it?’ This was
said not as some kind of macho challenge, but more as a means of
pointing to the fact that the way beyond suffering is neither to run
away from it, wallow in it or even grit one’s teeth and get through on
will alone – no, the encouragement of patient endurance is to hold
steady in the midst of difficulty, truly apprehend and digest the
experience of *dukkha*, understand its causes and let them go.

Teaching the Laity and Teaching Monastics
-----------------------------------------

There were many occasions when Ajahn Chah’s teachings were as applicable
to laypeople as to monastics, but there were also many instances when
they were not. The three volumes of this present collection – Daily Life
Practice, Formal Practice and Renunciant Practice – have been arranged
to reflect these differences of focus and applicability. Even though the
teachings have already been divided up in this way, this is still an
important factor to bear in mind when the reader is going through the
talks contained here – not to be aware of such differences could be
confusing. For example, the talk ‘Making the Heart Good’ is aimed at a
lay audience – a group of people who have come to visit Wat Pah Pong to
*tam boon*, to make offerings to the monastery both to support the
community there and to make some good *kamma* for themselves. On the
other hand, a talk like ‘The Flood of Sensuality’ would only be given to
the monastics, in that instance just to the monks and male novices.

This distinction was not made because of certain teachings being
‘secret’ or higher in some respect; rather it was through the need to
speak in ways that would be appropriate and useful to particular
audiences. Unlike the monastic, lay practitioners have a different range
of concerns and influences in their daily life: trying to find time for
formal meditation practice, maintaining an income, living with a spouse.
And most particularly, the lay community has not undertaken the vows of
the renunciant life – a lay student may keep the Five Precepts, whereas
the monastics would be keeping the Eight, Ten or 227 Precepts of the
various levels of ordination.

When teaching monastics alone, Ajahn Chah’s focus is much more
specifically on using the renunciant way of life as the key method of
training; the instruction therefore concerns itself with the hurdles,
pitfalls and glories that that way of life might bring. Since the
average age of the monks’ community in a monastery in Thailand is
usually around 25 to 30, and with the strict precepts around celibacy,
there was also a natural need for Ajahn Chah to skilfully guide the
restless and sexual energy that his monks would often experience. When
it was well-directed, the individuals would be able to contain and
employ that same energy, and transform it to help develop concentration
and insight.

The tone of some of the talks to monastics will in certain instances
also be seen to be considerably more directly confrontational than those
given to the lay community, for example, ‘Dhamma Fighting’. This manner
of expression represents something of the ‘take no prisoners’ style
which is characteristic of many of the teachers of the Thai Forest
Tradition. It is a way of speaking that is intended to rouse the
‘warrior heart’: an attitude toward spiritual practice which enables one
to be ready to endure all hardships and to be wise, patient and
faithful, regardless of how difficult things get.

At times this way of teaching may seem overly aggressive or combative in
its tone; the reader should therefore bear in mind that the spirit
behind such language is the endeavour to encourage the practitioner,
gladden the heart and provide supportive strength when dealing with the
multifarious challenges to freedom from greed, hatred and delusion. As
Ajahn Chah once said: ‘All those who seriously engage in spiritual
practice should expect to experience a great deal of friction and
difficulty.’ The heart is being trained to go against the current of
self-centred habits, so it’s quite natural for it to be buffeted around
somewhat.

As a final note on this aspect of Ajahn Chah’s teachings, particularly
those one might term ‘higher’ or ‘transcendent’, it is significant that
he didn’t exclude the laity from any instruction of this nature. If he
felt a group of people was ready for the highest levels of teaching, he
would impart them freely and openly, whether it was to laypeople or to
monastics, as in, for example, ‘Toward the Unconditioned’ or ‘Still,
Flowing Water’ where he states: ‘People these days study away, looking
for good and evil. But that which is beyond good and evil they know
nothing of.’ Like the Buddha, he never employed the ‘teacher’s closed
fist’, and made his choices of what to teach solely on the basis of what
would be useful to his listeners, not on their number of precepts and
their religious affiliation or lack of one.

Countering Superstition
-----------------------

Ajahn Chah was well known for his keenness to dispel superstition from
Buddhist practice in Thailand. He criticized the use of ‘magic’ charms,
amulets and fortune-telling. He rarely spoke about past or future lives,
other realms, visions or psychic experiences. Anyone who came to him
asking for the next winning lottery number (a very common reason why
some people go to visit famous Ajahns) would generally get very short
shrift. He saw that the Dhamma itself was the most priceless jewel,
which could provide genuine protection and security in life, and yet it
was continually overlooked for the sake of the promise of minor
improvements to *saṃsāra*.

He emphasized the usefulness and practicality of Buddhist practice,
countering the common belief that Dhamma was too high or abstruse for
the common person. His criticisms were not just aimed to break down
childish dependencies on good luck and magical charms; rather he wanted
people to invest in something that would truly serve them in their
lives.

In the light of this life-long effort, there was also an ironic twist of
circumstance that accompanied his funeral in 1993. He passed away on 16
January 1992 and they held the funeral exactly a year later; the
memorial stupa had 16 pillars, was 32 metres high, and had foundations
16 metres deep – consequently a huge number of people in Ubon Province
bought lottery tickets with ones and sixes together. The next day the
headlines in the local paper proclaimed: LUANG POR CHAH’S LAST GIFT TO
HIS DISCIPLES – the 16s had cleaned up and a couple of local bookmakers
had even been bankrupted.

Humour
------

That last story brings us to a final quality of Ajahn Chah’s teaching
style. He was an amazingly quick-witted man and a natural performer.
Although he could be very cool and forbidding, or sensitive and gentle
in his way of expression, he also used a high degree of humour in his
teaching. He had a way of employing wit to work his way into the hearts
of his listeners, not just to amuse but to help convey truths that would
otherwise not be received so easily.

His sense of humour and skilful eye for the tragi-comic absurdities of
life enabled people to see situations in such a way that they could
laugh at themselves and be guided to a wiser outlook. This might be in
matters of conduct, such as a famous display he once gave of the many
*wrong* ways to carry a monk’s bag: slung over the back, looped round
the neck, grabbed in the fist, scraped along the ground … Or it might be
in terms of some painful personal struggle. One time a young bhikkhu
came to him very downcast. He had seen the sorrows of the world and the
horror of beings’ entrapment in birth and death, and had realized that
‘I’ll never be able to laugh again – it’s all so sad and painful.’
Within forty-five minutes, via a graphic tale about a youthful squirrel
repeatedly attempting and falling short in its efforts to learn
tree-climbing, the monk was rolling on the floor clutching his sides,
tears pouring down his face as he was convulsed with the laughter that
he had thought would never return.

Last Years
----------

During the rains retreat of 1981 Ajahn Chah became seriously ill, with
what was apparently some form of stroke. His health had been shaky for
the previous few years, with dizzy spells and diabetic problems, and now
it went down with a crash. Over the next few months he received various
kinds of treatment, including a couple of operations, but nothing
helped. The slide continued until by the middle of the following year he
was paralysed but for some slight movement in one hand, and he had lost
the power of speech. He could still blink his eyes.

He remained in this state for the next ten years, his few areas of
control diminishing slowly until by the end all voluntary movement was
lost to him. During this time it was often said that he was still
teaching his students: hadn’t he reiterated endlessly that the body is
of the nature to sicken and decay, and that it is not under personal
control? As he put it somewhat prophetically in ‘Why Are We Here?’, a
talk given just before his health collapsed: ‘People come to visit, but
I can’t really receive them like I used to because my voice has just
about had it; my breath is just about gone. You can count it a blessing
that there’s still this body sitting here for you all to see now. Soon
you won’t see it. The breath will be finished; the voice will be gone.
They will fare in accordance with supporting factors, like all
compounded things.’

So here was a prime object lesson for all his students – neither a great
master like Ajahn Chah nor even the Buddha himself could escape the
inexorable laws of nature. The task, as always, was to find peace and
freedom by not identifying with the changing forms.

During this time, despite his severe limitations, he occasionally
managed to teach in ways other than just being an example of the
uncertain processes of life and by giving opportunity for his monks and
novices to offer their support through nursing care. The bhikkhus used
to work in shifts, three or four at a time, to look after Ajahn Chah’s
physical needs, as he required attention twenty-four hours a day. On one
particular shift two monks got into an argument, quite forgetting (as
often happens around paralyzed or comatose people) that the other
occupant of the room might be fully cognizant of what was going on. Had
Ajahn Chah been fully active, it would have been unthinkable that they
would have got into such a spat in front of him.

As the words got more heated an agitated movement began in the bed
across the room. Suddenly Ajahn Chah coughed violently and, according to
reports, sent a sizeable gob of phlegm shooting across the intervening
space, passing between the two protagonists and smacking into the wall
right beside them. The teaching was duly received and the argument came
to an abrupt and embarrassed conclusion.

During the course of his illness the life of the monasteries continued
much as before. The Master’s being both there yet not there served in a
strange way to help the community to adapt to communal decision-making
and to the concept of life without their beloved teacher at the centre
of everything. After such a great elder passes away it is not uncommon
for things to disintegrate rapidly and for all his students to go their
own way, the teacher’s legacy vanishing within a generation or two. It
is perhaps a testimony to how well Ajahn Chah trained people to be
self-reliant that whereas at the time of his falling sick there were
about 75 branch monasteries, this had increased to well over 100 by the
time he passed away, and has now grown to more than 300, in Thailand and
around the world.

After he passed away, his monastic community set about arranging his
funeral. In keeping with the spirit of his life and teachings, the
funeral was not to be just a ceremony but also a time for hearing and
practising Dhamma. It was held over ten days with several periods of
group meditation and instructional talks each day, these being given by
many of the most accomplished Dhamma teachers in the country. There were
about 6,000 monks, 1,000 nuns and just over 10,000 laypeople camped in
the forest for the 10 days. Beside them, an estimated 1,000,000 people
came passed through the monastery during the practice period; 400,000,
including the king and queen and the prime minister of Thailand, who
came on the day of the cremation itself.

Again, in the spirit of the standards Ajahn Chah espoused throughout his
teaching career, throughout this entire session, not one penny was
charged for anything: food was supplied for everyone through forty-two
free food kitchens, run and stocked by many of the branch monasteries;
over £120,000 worth of free Dhamma books were passed out; bottled water
was provided by the gallon through a local firm, and the local bus
company and other nearby lorry owners ferried out the thousands of monks
each morning to go on almsround through villages and towns in the area.
It was a grand festival of generosity and a fitting way to bid farewell
to the great man.

It is in the same spirit of generosity that this present edition of
Ajahn Chah’s Dhamma talks has been compiled. This compilation, ‘The
Collected Teachings of Ajahn Chah’, comprises most of Ajahn Chah’s talks
which have been previously published for free distribution in English.

May these teachings provide nourishing contemplation for seekers of the
Way and help to establish a heart which is awake, pure and peaceful.

Ajahn Amaro\\
February 2011

[^1]: Ayurvedic medicine is a system of traditional medicine native to
    India.
