The Four Noble Truths
=====================

\<span class="dropcaps-first"\>T\</span\>\<span
class="dropcaps-words"\>oday I have been invited\</span\> by the abbot
to give you a teaching, so I ask you all to sit quietly and compose your
minds. Due to the language barrier we must make use of a translator, so
if you do not pay proper attention you may not understand.

My stay here has been very pleasant. Both the Master and you, his
followers, have been very kind, all friendly and smiling, as befits
those who are practising the true Dhamma. Your property, too, is very
inspiring, but so big! I admire your dedication in renovating it to
establish a place for practising the Dhamma.

Having been a teacher for many years now, I’ve been through my share of
difficulties. At present there are altogether about forty branch
monasteries[^1] of my monastery, Wat Nong Pah Pong, but even these days
I have followers who are hard to teach. Some know but don’t bother to
practise, some don’t know and don’t try to find out. I don’t know what
to do with them. Why do human beings have minds like this? Being
ignorant is not so good, but even when I tell them, they still don’t
listen. I don’t know what more I can do. People are so full of doubts in
their practice, they’re always doubting. They all want to go to but they
don’t want to walk the path. It’s baffling. When I tell them to meditate
they’re afraid, or if not afraid then just plain sleepy. Mostly they
like to do the things I don’t teach. When I met the Venerable Abbot here
I asked him what his followers were like. He said they’re the same. This
is the pain of being a teacher.

The teaching I will present to you today is a way to solve problems in
the present moment, in this present life. Some people say that they have
so much work to do that they have no time to practise the Dhamma. ‘What
can we do?’ they ask. I ask them, ‘Don’t you breathe while you’re
working?’ ‘Yes, of course we breathe!’ ‘So how come you have time to
breathe when you’re so busy?’ They don’t know what to answer. ‘If you
simply have while working you will have plenty of time to practise.’

Practising meditation is just like breathing. While working we breathe,
while sleeping we breathe, while sitting down we breathe. Why do we have
time to breathe? Because we see the importance of the breath, we can
always find time to breathe. In the same way, if we see the importance
of meditation practice we will find the time to practise.

Have any of you ever suffered? Have you ever been happy? Right here is
the truth, this is where you must practise the Dhamma. Who is it who is
happy? The mind is happy. Who suffers? The mind suffers. Wherever these
things arise, that’s where they cease. Have you experienced happiness?
Have you experienced suffering? This is our problem. If we know the
cause of suffering, the end of suffering and the way leading to the end
of suffering we can solve the problem.

There are two kinds of suffering: ordinary suffering and the
extraordinary kind. Ordinary suffering is the suffering which is the
inherent nature of conditions: standing is suffering, sitting is
suffering, lying down is suffering. This is the suffering that is
inherent in all conditioned phenomena. Even the Buddha experienced these
things, he experienced comfort and pain, but he recognized them as
conditions in nature. He knew how to overcome these ordinary, natural
feelings of comfort and pain through understanding their true nature.
Because he understood this ‘natural suffering’ those feelings didn’t
upset him.

The important kind of suffering is the second kind, the suffering that
creeps in from the outside, the ‘extraordinary suffering’. If we are
sick we may have to get an injection from the doctor. When the needle
pierces the skin there is some pain which is only natural. When the
needle is withdrawn that pain disappears. This is like the ordinary kind
of suffering, it’s no problem, everybody experiences it. The
extraordinary suffering is the suffering that arises from what we call
grasping onto things. This is like having an injection with a syringe
filled with poison. This is no longer an ordinary kind of pain, it is
the pain which ends in death. This is similar to the suffering which
arises from grasping.

Wrong view, not knowing the impermanent nature of all conditioned
things, is another kind of problem. Conditioned things are the realm of
Not wanting things to change – if we think like this we must suffer.
When we think that the body is ourselves or belonging to us, we are
afraid when we see it change. Consider the breath: once it comes in it
must go out, having gone out it must come in again. This is its nature,
this is how we manage to live. Things don’t function in that way. This
is how conditions are but we don’t realize it.

Suppose we lost something. If we thought that object was really ours, we
would brood over it. If we couldn’t see it as a conditioned thing faring
according to the laws of nature, we would experience suffering. But if
you breathe in, can you live? Conditioned things must naturally change
in this way. To see this is to see the Dhamma, to see change. We live
dependent on this change. When we know how things are, then we can let
go of them.

The practice of Dhamma is to develop an understanding of the way of
things so that suffering doesn’t arise. If we think wrongly we are at
odds with the world, at odds with the Dhamma and with the truth. Suppose
you were sick and had to go into hospital. Most people think, ‘Please
don’t let me die, I want to get better.’ This is wrong thinking, it will
lead to suffering. You have to think to yourself, ‘If I recover I
recover, if I die I die.’ This is right thinking, because you can’t
ultimately control conditions. If you think like this, whether you die
or recover, you can’t go wrong, you don’t have to worry. The mind that
wants to get better at all costs, and is afraid of the thought of dying,
is the mind which doesn’t understand conditions. You should think, ‘If I
get better that’s fine, if I don’t get better that’s fine.’ This way we
can’t go wrong, we don’t have to be afraid or cry, because we have tuned
ourselves in to the way things are.

The Buddha saw clearly. His teaching is always relevant, never
out-dated. It never changes. In the present day it’s still the way it
is, it hasn’t changed. By taking this teaching to heart we can gain the
reward of peace and well-being.

In the teachings there is the reflection of ‘not-self’: ‘this is not my
self, this does not belong to me’. But people don’t like to listen to
this kind of teaching because they are attached to the idea of self.
This is the cause of suffering. You should take note of this.

Today a woman asked about how to deal with anger. I told her that the
next time she gets angry, she should wind up her alarm clock and put it
in front of her. Then she should give herself two hours for the anger to
go away. If it was really her anger she could probably tell it to go
away like this: ‘In two hours be gone!’ But anger isn’t really ours to
command. Sometimes in two hours it’s still not gone, at other times in
one hour it’s gone already. Holding onto anger as a personal possession
will cause suffering. If it really belonged to us it would have to obey
us. If it doesn’t obey us that means it’s only a deception. Don’t fall
for it. Whether the mind is happy or sad, don’t fall for it. Whether the
mind loves or hates, don’t fall for it, it’s all a deception.

Have any of you ever been angry? When you are angry does it feel good or
bad? If it feels bad then why don’t you throw that feeling away? Why
bother to keep it? How can you say that you are wise and intelligent
when you hold on to such things? Since the day you were born, how many
times has the mind tricked you into anger? Some days the mind can even
cause a whole family to quarrel, or cause you to cry all night. And yet
we still continue to get angry, we still hold onto things and suffer. If
you don’t see suffering, you will have to keep suffering indefinitely,
with no chance for respite. The world of saṃsāra is like this. If we
know the way it is, we can solve the problem.

The Buddha’s teaching states that there is no better means to overcome
suffering than to see that ‘this is not my self,’ ‘this is not mine.’
This is the greatest method. But we don’t usually pay attention to this.
When suffering arises we simply cry over it without learning from it.
Why is that so? We must take a good hard look at these things, to
develop the the

Take note, some of you may not be aware that this is Dhamma teaching.
I’m going to give you some Dhamma that’s outside the scriptures. Most
people read the scriptures but don’t see the Dhamma. Today I am going to
give you a teaching that’s outside the scriptures. Some people may miss
the point or not be able to understand it.

Suppose two people are walking together and see a duck and a chicken.
One of them says, ‘Why isn’t that chicken like the duck, why isn’t the
duck like the chicken?’ He wants the chicken to be a duck and the duck
to be a chicken. It’s impossible. If it’s impossible, then even if that
person were to wish for the duck to be a chicken and the chicken to be a
duck for the rest of his life it would not come to pass, because the
chicken is a chicken and the duck is a duck. As long as that person
thought like that he would suffer. The other person might see that the
chicken is a chicken and the duck is a duck, and that’s all there is to
it. There is no problem. He sees rightly. If you want the duck to be a
chicken and the chicken to be a duck, you are really going to suffer.

In the same way, the law of states that all things are impermanent. If
you want things to be permanent you’re going to suffer. Whenever
impermanence shows itself you’re going to be disappointed. One who sees
that things are naturally impermanent will be at ease, there will be no
conflict. The one who wants things to be permanent is going to have
conflict, maybe even losing sleep over it. This is to be ignorant of ,
impermanence, the teaching of the Buddha.

If you want to know the Dhamma where should you look? You must look
within the body and the mind. You won’t find it in the shelves of a
bookcase. To really see the Dhamma you have to look within your own body
and mind. There are only these two things. The mind is not visible to
the physical eye, it must be seen with the ‘mind’s eye’. Before the
Dhamma can be realized you must know where to look. The Dhamma that is
in the body must be seen in the body. And with what do we look at the
body? We look at the body with the mind. You won’t find the Dhamma
looking anywhere else, because both happiness and suffering arise right
here. Have you seen happiness arising in the trees? Or from the rivers,
or the weather? Happiness and suffering are feelings which arise in our
own bodies and minds.

Therefore the Buddha tells us to know the Dhamma right here. The Dhamma
is right here, we must look right here. The Master may tell you to look
at the Dhamma in the books, but if you think that this is where the
Dhamma *really* is, you’ll never see it. Having looked at the books you
must reflect on those teachings inwardly. Then you can understand the
Dhamma. Where does the real Dhamma exist? It exists right here in this
body and mind of ours. This is the essence of contemplation practice.

When we do this, wisdom will arise in our minds. When there is wisdom in
our minds, then no matter where we look there is Dhamma, we will see , ,
and at all times. means transient. If we cling to the things that are
transient we must suffer, because they are not us or ours (). But we
don’t see this, we always see them as being our self and belonging to
us.

This means that you don’t see the truth of convention. You should
understand conventions. For example, all of us sitting here have names.
Are our names born with us or are they assigned to us afterwards? Do you
understand? This is convention. Is convention useful? Of course it’s
useful. For example, suppose there are four men, A, B, C, and D. They
all must have their individual names for convenience in communicating
and working together. If we wanted to speak to Mr. A we could call Mr. A
and he would come, not the others. This is the convenience of
convention. But when we look deeply into the matter we will see that
really there isn’t anybody there. We will see transcendence. There is
only earth, water, wind and fire, the four elements. This is all there
is to this body of ours.

=1 But we don’t see it in this way because of the clinging power of
.[^2] If we were to look clearly we would see that there isn’t really
much to what we call a person. The solid part is the earth element, the
fluid part is the water element, the part which provides heat is called
the fire element. When we break things down we see that there is only
earth, water, wind and fire. Where is the person to be found? There
isn’t one.

That’s why the Buddha taught that there is no higher practice than to
see that ‘this is not my self and does not belong to me.’ They are
simply conventions. If we understand everything clearly in this way we
will be at peace. If we realize in the present moment the truth of
impermanence, that things are not our self or belonging to us, then when
they disintegrate we are at peace with them, because they don’t belong
to anybody anyway. They are merely the elements of earth, water, wind
and fire.

It’s difficult for people to see this, but even so it’s not beyond our
ability. If we can see this, we will find contentment, we will not have
so much anger, greed or delusion. There will always be Dhamma in our
hearts. There will be no need for jealousy and spite, because everybody
is simply earth, water, wind and fire. There’s nothing more to them than
this. When we accept this truth we will see the truth of the Buddha’s
teaching.

If we could see the truth of the Buddha’s teaching we wouldn’t have to
use up so many teachers! It wouldn’t be necessary to listen to teachings
every day. When we understand then we simply do what’s required of us.
But what makes people so difficult to teach is that they don’t accept
the teaching and argue with the teachers and the teaching. In front of
the teacher they behave a little better, but behind his back they become
thieves! People are really difficult to teach. The people in Thailand
are like this, that’s why they have to have so many teachers.

Be careful; if you’re not careful you won’t see the Dhamma. You must be
circumspect, taking the teaching and considering it well. Is this flower
pretty? Do you see the ugliness within this flower? For how many days
will it be pretty? What will it be like from now on? Why does it change
so? In three or four days you have to take it and throw it away, right?
It loses all its beauty. People are attached to beauty, attached to
goodness. If anything is good they just fall for it completely. The
Buddha tells us to look at pretty things as just pretty; we shouldn’t
become attached to them. If there is a pleasant feeling, we shouldn’t
fall for it. Goodness is not a sure thing, beauty is not a sure thing.
Nothing is certain. There is nothing in this world that is a certainty.
This is the truth. The things that aren’t true are the things that
change, such as beauty. The only truth it has is in its constant
changing. If we believe that things are beautiful, when their beauty
fades our mind loses its beauty too. When things are no longer good our
mind loses its goodness too. When they are destroyed or damaged we
suffer because we have clung to them as being our own. The Buddha tells
us to see that these things are simply constructs of nature. Beauty
appears and in not many days it fades. To see this is to have wisdom.

Therefore we should see impermanence. If we think something is pretty,
we should tell ourselves it isn’t, if we think something is ugly, we
should tell ourselves it isn’t. Try to see things in this way,
constantly reflect in this way. We will then see the truth within untrue
things, and see the certainty within the things that are uncertain.

Today I have been explaining the way to understand suffering, what
causes suffering, the cessation of suffering and the way leading to the
cessation of suffering. When you know suffering you should throw it out.
Knowing the cause of suffering you should throw it out. Practise to see
the cessation of suffering. See , and and suffering will cease.

When suffering ceases where do we go? What are we practising for? We are
practising to relinquish, not in order to gain anything. There was a
woman this afternoon who told me that she is suffering. I asked her what
she wants to be, and she said she wants to be enlightened. I said,
‘As long as you want to be enlightened you will never become
enlightened. Don’t want anything.’

When we know the truth of suffering, we throw out suffering. When we
know the cause of suffering, then we don’t create those causes, but
instead practise to bring suffering to its cessation. The practice
leading to the cessation of suffering is to see that ‘this is not a
self,’ ‘this is not me or them.’ Seeing in this way enables suffering to
cease. It’s like reaching our destination and stopping. That’s
cessation. That’s getting close to Nibbāna. To put it another way, going
forward is suffering, retreating is suffering and stopping is suffering.
Not going forward, not retreating and not stopping, is anything left?
Body and mind cease here. This is the cessation of suffering. Hard to
understand, isn’t it? If we diligently and consistently study this
teaching we will transcend things and reach understanding; there will be
cessation. This is the ultimate teaching of the Buddha, it’s the
finishing point. The Buddha’s teaching finishes at the point of total
relinquishment.

Today I offer this teaching to you all and to the Venerable Master also.
If there is anything wrong in it I ask your forgiveness. But don’t be in
a hurry to judge whether it is right or wrong, just listen to it first.
If I were to give you all a fruit and tell you it’s delicious, you
should take note of my words, but not believe me offhand, because you
haven’t tasted it yet. The teaching I give you today is the same. If you
want to know whether the ‘fruit’ is sweet or sour you have to slice a
piece off and taste it. Then you will know its sweetness or sourness.
Then you could believe me, because then you’d have seen for yourself. So
please don’t throw this ‘fruit’ away, keep it and taste it, know its
taste for yourself.

The Buddha didn’t have a teacher, you know. An ascetic once asked him
who his teacher was, and the Buddha answered that he didn’t have
one.[^3] The ascetic just walked off shaking his head. The Buddha was
being too honest. He was speaking to one who couldn’t know or accept the
truth. That’s why I tell you not to believe me. The Buddha said that to
simply believe others is foolish, because there is no clear knowing
within. That’s why the Buddha said ‘I have no teacher.’ This is the
truth. But you should look at this in the right way. If you
misunderstand it you won’t respect your teacher. Don’t go saying ‘I have
no teacher.’ You must rely on your teacher to tell you what is right and
wrong, and then you must practise accordingly.

Today is a fortunate day for all of us. I have had a chance to meet with
all of you and the Venerable Master. You wouldn’t think that we could
meet like this because we live so far apart. I think there must be some
special reason that we have been able to meet in this way. The Buddha
taught that everything that arises must have a cause. Don’t forget this.
There must be some cause. Perhaps in a previous existence we were
brothers and sisters in the same family. It’s possible. Another teacher
didn’t come, but I did. Why is that? Perhaps we are creating the causes
in the present moment itself. This is also possible.

I leave you all with this teaching. May you be diligent and arduous in
the practice. There is nothing better than the practice of Dhamma;
Dhamma is the supporter of the whole world. People are confused these
days because they do not know the Dhamma. If we have the Dhamma with us
we will be content. I am happy to have had this opportunity to help you
and the Venerable Teacher in developing the practice of Dhamma. I leave
you with my heartfelt good wishes. Tomorrow I will be leaving, I’m not
sure where for. This is only natural. When there is coming there must be
going, when there is going there must be coming. This is how the world
is. We shouldn’t be overjoyed or upset by the changes in the world.
There is happiness and then there is suffering; there is suffering and
then there is happiness; there is gain and then there is loss; there is
loss and then there is gain. This is the way things are.

In the Buddha’s time there were disciples of the Buddha who didn’t like
him, because the Buddha exhorted them to be diligent, to be heedful.
Those who were lazy were afraid of the Buddha and resented him. When he
died, one group of disciples cried and were distressed that they would
no longer have the Buddha to guide them. These ones were still not
clever. Another group of disciples were pleased and relieved that they
would no longer have the Buddha on their backs telling them what to do.
A third group of disciples were equanimous. They reflected that what
arises passes away as a natural consequence. There were these three
groups. Which group do you identify with? Do you want to be one of the
pleased ones or what? The group of disciples who cried when the Buddha
passed away had not yet realized the Dhamma. The second group were those
who resented the Buddha. He was always forbidding them from doing the
things they wanted to do. They lived in fear of the Buddha’s scorn and
reprimands, so when he passed away they were relieved.

These days things aren’t much different. It’s possible that the teacher
here has some followers who are resentful towards him. They might not
show it outwardly but it’s there in the mind. It’s normal for people who
still have defilements to feel this way. Even the Buddha had people
hating him. I myself have followers who resent me also. I tell them to
give up evil actions, but they cherish their evil actions. So they hate
me. There are plenty like this. May all of you who are intelligent make
yourselves firm in the practice of Dhamma.

[^1]: At the time of printing this book (2011), there are over
    three-hundred branch monasteries, large and small, of Wat Nong Pah
    Pong.

[^2]: One of the Four Bases of Clinging: , clinging to sense objects; :
    clinging to rites and rituals; : clinging to views, and , clinging
    to the idea of self.

[^3]: Soon after his enlightenment, the Buddha was walking on his way to
    Benares and was approached by a wandering ascetic, who said, ‘Your
    features are clear, friend, your bearing serene. Who is your
    teacher?’ The Buddha answered that there was no-one in this world
    who could claim to be his teacher, because he was completely
    self-enlightened. The ascetic could not understand his answer, and
    walked off, muttering, ‘Well, good for you, friend, good for you.’
