Tuccho Pothila
==============

<p class="chapter-footnote" markdown="1">*Note*: This talk has been
published elsewhere under the title: ‘*Tuccho Pothila – Venerable
Empty-Scripture*’</p>

<span class="dropcaps-first" markdown="1">T</span><span
class="dropcaps-words" markdown="1">here are two ways</span>&nbsp; to
support Buddhism. One is known as *āmisapūjā*, supporting through
material offerings: the four requisites of food, clothing, shelter and
medicine. There material offerings are given to the Saṅgha of monks and
nuns, enabling them to live in reasonable comfort for the practice of
Dhamma. This fosters the direct realization of the Buddha’s teaching, in
turn bringing continued prosperity to the Buddhist religion.

Buddhism can be likened to a tree. A tree has roots, a trunk, branches,
twigs and leaves. All the leaves and branches, including the trunk,
depend on the roots to absorb nutriment from the soil. Just as the tree
depends on the roots to sustain it, our actions and our speech are like
‘branches’ and ‘leaves’, which depend on the mind, the ‘root’, absorbing
nutriment, which it then sends out to the ‘trunk’, ‘branches’ and
‘leaves’. These in turn bear fruit as our speech and actions. Whatever
state the mind is in, skilful or unskilful, it expresses that quality
outwardly through our actions and speech.

Therefore, the support of Buddhism through the practical application of
the teaching is the most important kind of support. For example, in the
ceremony of determining the precepts on observance days, the teacher
describes those unskilful actions which should be avoided. But if you
simply go through this ceremony without reflecting on their meaning,
progress is difficult and you will be unable to find the true practice.
The real support of Buddhism must therefore be done through
*paṭipattipūjā,* the ‘offering’ of practice, cultivating true restraint,
concentration and wisdom. Then you will know what Buddhism is all about.
If you don’t understand through practice, you still won’t know, even if
you learn the whole Tipiṭaka.

In the time of the Buddha there was a monk known as Tuccho Pothila.
Tuccho Pothila was very learned, thoroughly versed in the scriptures and
texts. He was so famous that he was revered by people everywhere and had
eighteen monasteries under his care. When people heard the name ‘Tuccho
Pothila’ they were awe-struck and nobody would dare question anything he
taught, so much did they revere his command of the teachings. Tuccho
Pothila was one of the Buddha’s most learned disciples.

One day he went to pay respects to the Buddha. As he was paying his
respects, the Buddha said, ‘Ah, hello, Venerable Empty Scripture!’ Just
like that! They conversed for a while until it was time to go, and then,
as he was taking leave of the Buddha, the Buddha said, ‘Oh, leaving now,
Venerable Empty Scripture?’

That was all the Buddha said. On arriving, ‘Oh, hello, Venerable Empty
Scripture.’ When it was time to go, ‘Ah, leaving now, Venerable Empty
Scripture?’ The Buddha didn’t expand on it, that was all the teaching he
gave. Tuccho Pothila, the eminent teacher, was puzzled, ‘Why did the
Buddha say that? What did he mean?’ He thought and thought, turning over
everything he had learned, until eventually he realized, ‘It’s true!
Venerable Empty Scripture – a monk who studies but doesn’t practise.’
When he looked into his heart he saw that really he was no different
from laypeople. Whatever they aspired to he also aspired to, whatever
they enjoyed he also enjoyed. There was no real *‘samaṇa’* within him,
no truly profound quality capable of firmly establishing him in the
Noble Way and providing true peace.

So he decided to practise. But there was nowhere for him to go to. All
the teachers around were his own students, no-one would dare accept him.
Usually when people meet their teacher they become timid and
deferential, and so no-one would dare become his teacher.

Finally he went to see a certain young novice, who was enlightened, and
asked to practise under him. The novice said, ‘Yes, sure you can
practise with me, but only if you’re sincere. If you’re not sincere then
I won’t accept you.’ Tuccho Pothila pledged himself as a student of the
novice.

The novice then told him to put on all his robes. Now there happened to
be a muddy bog nearby. When Tuccho Pothila had neatly put on all his
robes, expensive ones they were, too, the novice said, ‘Okay, now run
down into this muddy bog. If I don’t tell you to stop, don’t stop. If I
don’t tell you to come out, don’t come out. Okay, run!’

Tuccho Pothila, neatly robed, plunged into the bog. The novice didn’t
tell him to stop until he was completely covered in mud. Finally he
said, ‘You can stop, now’ so he stopped. ‘Okay, come out now!’ and so he

This clearly showed the novice that Tuccho Pothila had given up his
pride. He was ready to accept the teaching. If he wasn’t ready to learn
he wouldn’t have run into the bog like that, being such a famous
teacher, but he did it. The young novice, seeing this, knew that Tuccho
Pothila was sincerely determined to practise.

When Tuccho Pothila had come out of the bog, the novice gave him the
teaching. He taught him to observe the sense objects, to know the mind
and to know the sense objects, using the simile of a man catching a
lizard hiding in a termite mound. If the mound had six holes in it, how
would he catch it? He would have to seal off five of the holes and leave
just one open. Then he would have to simply watch and wait, guarding
that one hole. When the lizard ran out he could catch it.

Observing the mind is like this. Closing off the eyes, ears, nose,
tongue and body, we leave only the mind. To ‘close off’ the senses means
to restrain and compose them, observing only the mind. Meditation is
like catching the lizard. We use sati to note the breath. Sati is the
quality of recollection, as in asking yourself, ‘What am I doing?’
*Sampajañña* is the awareness that ‘now I am doing such and such’. We
observe the in and out breathing with sati and *sampajañña*.

This quality of recollection is something that arises from practice,
it’s not something that can be learned from books. Know the feelings
that arise. The mind may be fairly inactive for a while and then a
feeling arises. Sati works in conjunction with these feelings,
recollecting them. There is sati, the recollection that ‘I will speak’,
‘I will go’, ‘I will sit’ and so on, and then there is *sampajañña*, the
awareness that ‘now I am walking’, ‘I am lying down’, ‘I am experiencing
such and such a mood.’ With sati and *sampajañña*, we can know our minds
in the present moment and we will know how the mind reacts to sense
impressions.

That which is aware of sense objects is called ‘mind’. Sense objects
‘wander into’ the mind. For instance, there is a sound, like the
electric drill here. It enters through the ear and travels inwards to
the mind, which acknowledges that it is the sound of an electric drill.
That which acknowledges the sound is called ‘mind’.

Now this mind which acknowledges that sound is quite basic. It’s just
the average mind. Perhaps annoyance arises within the one who
acknowledges. We must further train ‘the one who acknowledges’ to become
‘the one who knows’ in accordance with the truth – known as *Buddho.* If
we don’t clearly know in accordance with the truth then we get annoyed
at sounds of people, cars, electric drills and so on. This is just the
ordinary, untrained mind acknowledging the sound with annoyance. It
knows in accordance with its preferences, not in accordance with the
truth. We must further train it to know with vision and insight,
*ñāṇadassana*,[^1] the power of the refined mind, so that it knows the
sound as simply sound. If we don’t cling to sound there is no annoyance.
The sound arises and we simply note it. This is called truly knowing the
arising of sense objects. If we develop the *Buddho*, clearly realizing
the sound as sound, then it doesn’t annoy us. It arises according to
conditions, it is not a being, an individual, a self, an ‘us’ or ‘them’.
It’s just sound. The mind lets go.

This knowing is called *Buddho*, the knowledge that is clear and
penetrating. With this knowledge we can let the sound simply be sound.
It doesn’t disturb us unless we disturb it by thinking, ‘I don’t want to
hear that sound, it’s annoying.’ Suffering arises because of this
thinking. Right here is the cause of suffering, that we don’t know the
truth of this matter, we haven’t developed the *Buddho*. We are not yet
clear, not yet awake, not yet aware. This is the raw, untrained mind.
This mind is not yet truly useful to us.

Therefore the Buddha taught that this mind must be trained and
developed. We must develop the mind just like we develop the body, but
we do it in a different way. To develop the body we must exercise it,
jogging in the morning and evening and so on. This is exercising the
body. As a result the body becomes more agile, stronger, the respiratory
and nervous systems become more efficient. To exercise the mind we don’t
have to move it around, but bring it to a halt, bring it to rest.

For instance, when practising meditation, we take an object, such as the
in- and out-breathing, as our foundation. This becomes the focus of our
attention and reflection. We look at the breathing. To look at the
breathing means to follow the breathing with awareness, noting its
rhythm, its coming and going. We put awareness into the breath,
following the natural in and out breathing and letting go of all else.
As a result of staying on one object of awareness, our mind becomes
refreshed. If we let the mind think of this, that and the other, there
are many objects of awareness; the mind doesn’t unify, it doesn’t come
to rest.

To say the mind stops means that it feels as if it’s stopped, it doesn’t
go running here and there. It’s like having a sharp knife. If we use the
knife to cut at things indiscriminately, such as stones, bricks and
grass, our knife will quickly become blunt. We should use it for cutting
only the things it was meant for. Our mind is the same. If we let the
mind wander after thoughts and feelings which have no value or use, the
mind becomes tired and weak. If the mind has no energy, wisdom will not
arise, because the mind without energy is the mind without samādhi.

If the mind hasn’t stopped you can’t clearly see the sense objects for
what they are. The knowledge that the mind is the mind, sense objects
are merely sense objects, is the root from which Buddhism has grown and
developed. This is the heart of Buddhism.

We must cultivate this mind, develop it, training it in calm and
insight. We train the mind to have restraint and wisdom by letting the
mind stop and allowing wisdom to arise, by knowing the mind as it is.

You know, the way we human beings are, the way we do things, we are just
like little children. A child doesn’t know anything. To an adult
observing the behaviour of a child, the way it plays and jumps around,
its actions don’t seem to have much purpose. If our mind is untrained it
is like a child. We speak without awareness and act without wisdom. We
may fall to ruin or cause untold harm and not even know it. A child is
ignorant, it plays as children do. Our ignorant mind is the same.

So we should train this mind. The Buddha taught us to train the mind, to
teach the mind. Even if we support Buddhism with the four requisites,
our support is still superficial, it reaches only the ‘bark’ or
‘sapwood’ of the tree. The real support of Buddhism must be done through
the practice, nowhere else, training our actions, speech and thoughts
according to the teachings. This is much more fruitful. If we are
straight and honest, possessed of restraint and wisdom, our practice
will bring prosperity. There will be no cause for spite and hostility.
This is how our religion teaches us.

If we determine the precepts simply out of tradition, then even though
the Ajahn teaches the truth, our practice will be deficient. We may be
able to study the teachings and repeat them, but we have to practise
them if we really want to understand. If we do not develop the practice,
this may well be an obstacle to our penetrating to the heart of Buddhism
for countless lifetimes to come. We will not understand the essence of
the Buddhist religion.

Therefore the practice is like a key, the key of meditation. If we have
the right key in our hand, no matter how tightly the lock is closed,
when we take the key and turn it, the lock falls open. If we have no key
we can’t open the lock. We will never know what is in the trunk.

Actually there are two kinds of knowledge. One who knows the Dhamma
doesn’t simply speak from memory, he speaks the truth. Worldly people
usually speak with conceit. For example, suppose there were two people
who hadn’t seen each other for a long time, maybe they had gone to live
in different provinces or countries for a while, and then one day they
happened to meet on the train, ‘Oh! What a surprise. I was just thinking
of looking you up!’ Perhaps it’s not true. Really they hadn’t thought of
each other at all, but they say so out of excitement. And so it becomes
a lie. Yes, it’s lying out of heedlessness. This is lying without
knowing it. It’s a subtle form of defilement, and it happens very often.

So with regard to the mind, Tuccho Pothila followed the instructions of
the novice: breathing in, breathing out, mindfully aware of each breath,
until he saw the liar within him, the lying of his own mind. He saw the
defilements as they came up, just like the lizard coming out of the
termite mound. He saw them and perceived their true nature as soon as
they arose. He noticed how one minute the mind would concoct one thing,
the next moment something else.

Thinking is a *saṅkhata dhamma,* something which is created or concocted
from supporting conditions. It’s not *asaṅkhata dhamma*, the
unconditioned. The well-trained mind, one with perfect awareness, does
not concoct mental states. This kind of mind penetrates to the Noble
Truths and transcends any need to depend on externals. To know the Noble
Truths is to know the truth.

The proliferating mind tries to avoid this truth, saying, ‘that’s good’
or ‘this is beautiful’, but if there is *Buddho* in the mind it can no
longer deceive us, because we know the mind as it is. The mind can no
longer create deluded mental states, because there is the clear
awareness that all mental states are unstable, imperfect, and a source
of suffering to one who clings to them.

For Tuccho Pothila, ‘the one who knows’ was constantly in his mind,
wherever he went. He observed the various creations and proliferation of
the mind with understanding. He saw how the mind lied in so many ways.
He grasped the essence of the practice, seeing that ‘This lying mind is
the one to watch – this is the one which leads us into extremes of
happiness and suffering and causes us to endlessly spin around in the
cycle of ‘saṃsāra’, with its pleasure and pain, good and evil – all
because of this lying mind.’ Tuccho Pothila realized the truth, and
grasped the essence of the practice, just like a man grasping the tail
of the lizard. He saw the workings of the deluded mind.

For us it’s the same. Only this mind is important. That’s why we need to
train the mind. Now if the mind is the mind, what are we going to train
it with? By having continuous sati and *sampajañña* we will be able to
know the mind. This one who knows is a step beyond the mind, it is that
which knows the state of the mind. The mind is the mind. That which
knows the mind as simply mind is the one who knows. It is above the
mind. The one who knows is above the mind, and that is how it is able to
look after the mind, to teach the mind to know what is right and what is
wrong. In the end everything comes back to this proliferating mind. If
the mind is caught up in its proliferations there is no awareness and
the practice is fruitless.

So we must train this mind to hear the Dhamma, to cultivate the
*Buddho*, the clear and radiant awareness; that which exists above and
beyond the ordinary mind, and knows all that goes on within it. This is
why we meditate on the word *Buddho*, so that we can know the mind
beyond the mind. Just observe all the mind’s movements, whether good or
bad, until the one who knows realizes that the mind is simply mind, not
a self or a person. This is called *cittānupassanā*, contemplation of
mind.[^2] Seeing in this way we will understand that the mind is
transient, imperfect and ownerless. This mind doesn’t belong to us.

We can summarize thus: the mind is that which acknowledges sense
objects; sense objects are sense objects as distinct from the mind; ‘the
one who knows’ knows both the mind and the sense objects for what they
are. We must use sati to constantly cleanse the mind. Everybody has
sati, even a cat has it when it’s going to catch a mouse. A dog has it
when it barks at people. This is a form of sati, but it’s not sati
according to the Dhamma. Everybody has sati, but there are different
levels of it, just as there are different levels of looking at things.
For instance, when I say to contemplate the body, some people say, ‘What
is there to contemplate in the body? Anybody can see it. *Kesā* we can
see already, *lomā* we can see already, hair, nails, teeth and skin we
can see already. So what?’

This is how people are. They can see the body all right but their seeing
is faulty, they don’t see with the *Buddho*, ‘the one who knows’, the
awakened one. They only see the body in the ordinary way, they see it
visually. Simply to see the body is not enough. If we only see the body
there is trouble. You must see the body within the body, then things
become much clearer. Just seeing the body you get fooled by it, charmed
by its appearance. Not seeing transience, imperfection and
ownerlessness, *kāmachanda* arises. You become fascinated by forms,
sounds, odours, flavours and feelings. Seeing in this way is to see with
the mundane eye of the flesh, causing you to love and hate and
discriminate into pleasant and unpleasant feeling.

The Buddha taught that this is not enough. You must see with the ‘mind’s
eye’. See the body within the body. If you really look into the body,
Ugh! It’s so repulsive. There are today’s things and yesterday’s things
all mixed up in there, you can’t tell what’s what. Seeing in this way is
much clearer than to see with the carnal eye. Contemplate, see with the
eye of the mind, with the wisdom eye.

People understand this in different ways. Some people don’t know what
there is to contemplate in the five meditations, head hair, body hair,
nails, teeth and skin. They say they can see all those things already,
but they can only see them with the carnal eye, with this ‘crazy eye’
which only looks at the things it wants to look at. To see the body in
the body you have to look more clearly.

This is the practice that can uproot clinging to the five *khandhas.* To
uproot attachment is to uproot suffering, because attachment to the five
khandhas is the cause of suffering. If suffering arises it is here. It’s
not that the five khandhas are in themselves suffering, but the clinging
to them as being one’s own, that’s suffering.

If you see the truth of these things clearly through meditation
practice, then suffering becomes unwound, like a screw or a bolt. When
the bolt is unwound, it withdraws. The mind unwinds in the same way,
letting go; withdrawing from the obsession with good and evil,
possessions, praise and status, happiness and suffering.

If we don’t know the truth of these things it’s like tightening the
screw all the time. It gets tighter and tighter until it’s crushing you
and you suffer over everything. When you know how things are then you
unwind the screw. In Dhamma language we call this the arising of
*nibbidā,* disenchantment. You become weary of things and lay down the
fascination with them. If you unwind in this way you will find peace.

The cause of suffering is clinging to things. So we should get rid of
the cause, cut off its root and not allow it to cause suffering again.
People have only one problem – the problem of clinging. Just because of
this one thing people will kill each other. All problems, be they
individual, family or social, arise from this one root. Nobody wins,
they kill each other but in the end no-one gets anything. It is all
pointless, I don’t know why people keep on killing each other.

Power, possessions, status, praise, happiness and suffering – these are
the worldly dhammas. These worldly dhammas engulf worldly beings.
Worldly beings are led around by the worldly dhammas: gain and loss,
acclaim and slander, status and loss of status, happiness and suffering.
These dhammas are trouble makers; if you don’t reflect on their true
nature you will suffer. People even commit murder for the sake of
wealth, status or power. Why? Because they take this too seriously. They
get appointed to some position and it goes to their heads, like the man
who became headman of the village. After his appointment he became
‘power-drunk’. If any of his old friends came to see him he’d say,
‘Don’t come around so often. Things aren’t the same anymore.’

The Buddha taught us to understand the nature of possessions, status,
praise and happiness. Take these things as they come but let them be.
Don’t let them go to your head. If you don’t really understand these
things, you become fooled by your power, your children and relatives, by
everything! If you understand them clearly, you know they’re all
impermanent conditions. If you cling to them, they become defiled.

All of these things arise afterwards. When people are first born there
are simply *nāma* and *rūpa,* that’s all. We add on the business of ‘Mr.
Jones’, ‘Miss Smith’ or whatever later on. This is done according to
convention. Still later there are the appendages of ‘Colonel’, ‘General’
and so on. If we don’t really understand these things we think they are
real and carry them around with us. We carry possessions, status, name
and rank around. If you have power you can call all the tunes … ‘Take
this one and execute him. Take that one and throw him in jail.’ Rank
gives power. Clinging takes hold here at this word, ‘rank’. As soon as
people have rank they start giving orders; right or wrong, they just act
on their moods. So they go on making the same old mistakes, deviating
further and further from the true path.

One who understands the Dhamma won’t behave like this. Good and evil
have been in the world since who knows when. If possessions and status
come your way, then let them simply be possessions and status – don’t
let them become your identity. Just use them to fulfil your obligations
and leave it at that. You remain unchanged. If we have meditated on
these things, no matter what comes our way we will not be mislead by it.
We will be untroubled, unaffected and constant. Everything is pretty
much the same, after all.

This is how the Buddha wanted us to understand things. No matter what
you receive, the mind does not add anything to it. They appoint you a
city councillor, ‘Okay, so I’m a city councillor, but I’m not.’ They
appoint you head of the group, ‘Sure I am, but I’m not.’ Whatever they
make of you, ‘Yes I am, but I’m not!’ In the end what are we anyway? We
all just die in the end. No matter what they make you, in the end it’s
all the same. What can you say? If you can see things in this way you
will have a solid abiding and true contentment. Nothing is changed.

Don’t be fooled by things. Whatever comes your way, it’s just
conditions. There’s nothing which can entice a mind like this to create
or proliferate, to seduce it into greed, aversion or delusion.

This is what it is to be a true supporter of Buddhism. Whether you are
among those who are being supported (i.e., the Saṅgha) or those who are
supporting (the laity) please consider this thoroughly. Cultivate the
*sīla-dhamma* within you. This is the surest way to support Buddhism. To
support Buddhism with the offerings of food, shelter and medicine is
good also, but such offerings only reach the ‘sapwood’ of Buddhism.
Please don’t forget this. A tree has bark, sapwood and heartwood, and
these three parts are interdependent. The heartwood must rely on the
bark and the sapwood. The sapwood relies on the bark and the heartwood.
They all exist interdependently, just like the teachings of moral
discipline, concentration and wisdom.[^3] The teaching on moral
discipline is to establish your speech and actions in rectitude. The
teaching on concentration is to firmly fix the mind. The teaching on
wisdom is the thorough understanding of the nature of all conditions.
Study this, practise this, and you will understand Buddhism in the most
profound way.

If you don’t realize these things, you will be fooled by possessions,
fooled by rank, fooled by anything you come into contact with. Simply
supporting Buddhism in the external way will never put an end to the
fighting and squabbling, the grudges and animosity, the stabbing and
shooting. If these things are to cease we must reflect on the nature of
possessions, rank, praise, happiness and suffering. We must consider our
lives and bring them in line with the teaching. We should reflect that
all beings in the world are part of one whole. We are like them, they
are like us. They have happiness and suffering just like we do. It’s all
much the same. If we reflect in this way, peace and understanding will
arise. This is the foundation of Buddhism.

[^1]: Literally: knowledge and insight (into the Four Noble Truths).

[^2]: One of the four foundations of mindfulness: body, feeling, mind,
    and dhammas.

[^3]: Sīla, samādhi, paññā.
