Our Real Home
=============

<span class="dropcaps-first" markdown="1">N</span><span
class="dropcaps-words" markdown="1">ow determine in your
mind</span>&nbsp; to listen respectfully to the Dhamma. While I am
speaking, be as attentive to my words as if it was the Lord Buddha
himself sitting before you. Close your eyes and make yourself
comfortable, composing your mind and making it one-pointed. Humbly allow
the Triple Gem of wisdom, truth and purity to abide in your heart as a
way of showing respect to the Fully Enlightened One.

Today I have brought nothing of material substance to offer you, only
the Dhamma, the teachings of the Lord Buddha. You should understand that
even the Buddha himself, with his great store of accumulated virtue,
could not avoid physical death. When he reached old age he ceded his
body and let go of the heavy burden. Now you too must learn to be
satisfied with the many years you’ve already depended on the body. You
should feel that it’s enough.

Like household utensils that you’ve had for a long time – cups, saucers,
plates and so on – when you first had them they were clean and shining,
but now after using them for so long, they’re starting to wear out. Some
are already broken, some have disappeared, and those that are left are
wearing out, they have no stable form. And it’s their nature to be that
way. Your body is the same; it’s been continually changing from the day
you were born, through childhood and youth, until now it’s reached old
age. You must accept this. The Buddha said that conditions, whether
internal, bodily conditions or external conditions, are not-self, their
nature is to change. Contemplate this truth clearly.

This very lump of flesh lying here in decline is reality
(*sacca-dhamma*). The facts of this body are reality, they are the
timeless teaching of the Lord Buddha. The Buddha taught us to
contemplate this and come to terms with its nature. We must be able to
be at peace with the body, no matter what state it is in. The Buddha
taught that we should ensure that it’s only the body that is locked up
in jail and the mind is not imprisoned along with it. Now as your body
begins to run down and wear out with age, don’t resist, but also don’t
let your mind deteriorate along with it. Keep the mind separate. Give
energy to the mind by realizing the truth of the way things are. The
Lord Buddha taught that this is the nature of the body, it can’t be any
other way. Having been born it gets old and sick and then it dies. This
is a great truth that you are presently witnessing. Look at the body
with wisdom and realize this.

If your house is flooded or burnt to the ground, whatever the threat to
it, let it concern only the house. If there’s a flood, don’t let it
flood your mind. If there’s a fire, don’t let it burn your heart. Let it
be merely the house, that which is outside of you that is flooded or
burned. Now is the time to allow the mind to let go of attachments.

You’ve been alive a long time now. Your eyes have seen any number of
forms and colours, your ears have heard so many sounds, you’ve had any
number of experiences. And that’s all they were – experiences. You’ve
eaten delicious foods, and all those good tastes were just good tastes,
nothing more. The bad tastes were just bad tastes, that’s all. If the
eye sees a beautiful form that’s all it is – a beautiful form. An ugly
form is just an ugly form. The ear hears an entrancing, melodious sound
and it’s nothing more than that. A grating, discordant sound is simply
that.

The Buddha said that rich or poor, young or old, human or animal, no
being in this world can maintain itself in any single state for long.
Everything experiences change and deprivation. This is a fact of life
about which we can do nothing to remedy. But the Buddha said that what
we can do is to contemplate the body and mind to see their
impersonality, that neither of them is ‘me’ nor ‘mine’. They have only a
provisional reality. It’s like this house, it’s only nominally yours.
You couldn’t take it with you anywhere. The same applies to your wealth,
your possessions and your family – they’re yours only in name. They
don’t really belong to you, they belong to nature.

Now this truth doesn’t apply to you alone, everyone is in the same boat
– even the Lord Buddha and his enlightened disciples. They differed from
us only in one respect, and that was their acceptance of the way things
are. They saw that it could be no other way.

So the Buddha taught us to probe and examine the body, from the soles of
the feet up to the crown of the head, and then back down to the feet
again. Just take a look at the body. What sort of things do you see? Is
there anything intrinsically clean there? Can you find any abiding
essence? This whole body is steadily degenerating. The Buddha taught us
to see that it doesn’t belong to us. It’s natural for the body to be
this way, because all conditioned phenomena are subject to change. How
else would you have it? In fact there is nothing wrong with the way the
body is. It’s not the body that causes suffering, it’s wrong thinking.
When you see things in the wrong way, there’s bound to be confusion.

It’s like the water of a river. It naturally flows downhill, it never
flows uphill. That’s its nature. If a person was to go and stand on the
river bank and want the water to flow back uphill, he would be foolish.
Wherever he went his foolish thinking would allow him no peace of mind.
He would suffer because of his wrong view, his thinking against the
stream. If he had right view he would see that the water must inevitably
flow downhill, and until he realized and accepted that fact he would be
bewildered and frustrated.

The river that must flow down the gradient is like your body. Having
been young your body’s become old and is meandering towards its death.
Don’t go wishing it were otherwise, it’s not something you have the
power to remedy. The Buddha told us to see the way things are and then
let go of our clinging to them. Take this feeling of letting go as your
refuge.

Keep meditating even if you feel tired and exhausted. Let your mind be
with the breath. Take a few deep breaths and then establish the
attention on the breath, using the mantra word Bud-dho. Make this
practice continual. The more exhausted you feel the more subtle and
focused your concentration must be, so that you can cope with any
painful sensations that arise. When you start to feel fatigued then
bring all your thinking to a halt, let the mind gather itself together
and then turn to knowing the breath. Just keep up the inner recitation,
*Bud-dho*, *Bud-dho*. Let go of all externals. Don’t go grasping at
thoughts of your children and relatives, don’t grasp at anything
whatsoever. Let go. Let the mind unite in a single point and let that
composed mind dwell with the breath. Let the breath be its sole object
of knowledge. Concentrate until the mind becomes increasingly subtle,
until feelings are insignificant and there is great inner clarity and
wakefulness. Then any painful sensations that arise will gradually cease
of their own accord.

Finally you’ll look on the breath as if it were some relatives come to
visit you. When the relatives leave, you follow them out to see them
off. You watch until they’ve walked up the drive and out of sight, and
then you go back indoors. We watch the breath in the same way. If the
breath is coarse we know that it’s coarse, if it’s subtle we know that
it’s subtle. As it becomes increasingly fine we keep following it, at
the same time awakening the mind. Eventually the breath disappears
altogether and all that remains is that feeling of alertness. This is
called meeting the Buddha. We have that clear, wakeful awareness called
*Bud-dho*, the one who knows, the awakened one, the radiant one. This is
meeting and dwelling with the Buddha, with knowledge and clarity. It was
only the historical Buddha who passed away. The true Buddha, the Buddha
that is clear, radiant knowing, can still be experienced and attained
today. And if we do attain it, the heart is one.

So let go, put everything down, everything except the knowing. Don’t be
fooled if visions or sounds arise in your mind during meditation. Lay
them all down. Don’t take hold of anything at all, just stay with this
unified awareness. Don’t worry about the past or the future, just be
still and you will reach the place where there’s no advancing, no
retreating and no stopping, where there’s nothing to grasp at or cling
to. Why? Because there’s no self, no ‘me’ or ‘mine’. It’s all gone. The
Buddha taught to empty yourself of everything in this way, not to carry
anything around; he taught us to know, and having known, let go.

Realizing the Dhamma, the path to freedom from the round of birth and
death, is a task that we all have to do alone. So keep trying to let go
and understand the teachings. Put effort into your contemplation. Don’t
worry about your family. At the moment they are as they are, in the
future they will be like you. There’s no-one in the world who can escape
this fate. The Buddha taught to lay down those things that lack a real
abiding essence. If you lay everything down you will see the real truth,
if you don’t, you won’t. That’s the way it is. And it’s the same for
everyone in the world. So don’t grasp at anything.

Even if you find yourself thinking, well that’s all right too, as long
as you think wisely. Don’t think foolishly. If you think of your
children, think of them with wisdom, not with foolishness. Whatever the
mind turns to, think of it with wisdom, be aware of its nature. To know
something with wisdom is to let it go and have no suffering over it. The
mind is bright, joyful and at peace. It turns away from distractions and
is undivided. Right now what you can look to for help and support is
your breath.

This is your own work, no-one else’s. Leave others to do their own work.
You have your own duty and responsibility, you don’t have to take on
those of your family. Don’t take on anything else, let it all go. This
letting go will make your mind calm. Your sole responsibility right now
is to focus your mind and bring it to peace. Leave everything else to
the others. Forms, sounds, odours, tastes … leave them to the others to
attend to. Put everything behind you and do your own work, fulfil your
own responsibility. Whatever arises in your mind, be it fear of pain,
fear of death, anxiety about others or whatever, say to it, ‘Don’t
disturb me. You’re no longer any concern of mine.’ Just keep this to
yourself when you see those ‘dhammas’ arise.

What does the word dhamma refer to? Everything is a dhamma, there is
nothing that is not a dhamma. And what about ‘world’? The world is the
very mental state that is agitating you at the present moment. ‘What are
they going to do? When I’m gone who will look after them? How will they
manage?’ This is all just the ‘world’. Even the mere arising of a
thought fearing death or pain is the world. Throw the world away! The
world is the way it is. If you allow it to dominate your mind it becomes
obscured and can’t see itself. So whatever appears in the mind, just
say, ‘This isn’t my business. It’s impermanent, unsatisfactory and
not-self.’

Thinking you’d like to go on living for a long time will make you
suffer. But thinking you’d like to die right away or very quickly isn’t
right either. It’s suffering, isn’t it? Conditions don’t belong to us,
they follow their own natural laws. You can’t do anything about the way
the body is. You can beautify it a little, make it attractive and clean
for a while, like the young girls who paint their lips and let their
nails grow long, but when old age arrives, everybody’s in the same boat.
That’s the way the body is, you can’t make it any other way. What you
can improve and beautify is the mind.

Anyone can build a house of wood and bricks, but the Buddha taught that
that sort of home is not our real home, it’s only nominally ours. It’s
home in the world and it follows the ways of the world. Our real home is
inner peace. An external, material home may well be pretty but it is not
very peaceful. There’s this worry and then that, this anxiety and then
that. So we say it’s not our real home, it’s external to us. Sooner or
later we’ll have to give it up. It’s not a place we can live in
permanently because it doesn’t truly belong to us, it belongs to the
world. Our body is the same. We take it to be a self, to be ‘me’ or
‘mine’, but in fact it’s not really so at all, it’s another worldly
home. Your body has followed its natural course from birth, and now that
it’s old and sick, you can’t forbid it from being that. That’s the way
it is. Wanting it to be any different would be as foolish as wanting a
duck to be like a chicken. When you see that that’s impossible – that a
duck must be a duck and a chicken must be a chicken, and that the bodies
have to get old and die – you will find courage and energy. However much
you want the body to go on lasting, it won’t do that.

The Buddha said:

> *Aniccā vata saṅkhārā*\\
> Impermanent, alas, are all conditions,
>
> *Uppāda-vaya-dhammino*\\
> Subject to rise and fall.
>
> *Uppajjitvā nirujjhanti*\\
> Having arisen, they cease.
>
> *Tesaṃ vūpasamo sukho.*\\
> Their stilling is bliss.

The word *saṅkhārā* refers to this body and mind. *Saṅkhārā* are
impermanent and unstable. Having come into being they disappear, having
arisen they pass away, and yet everyone wants them to be permanent. This
is foolishness. Look at the breath. Once it’s gone in, it goes out,
that’s its nature, that’s how it has to be. The inhalations and
exhalations have to alternate, there must be change. Conditions exist
through change, you can’t prevent it. Just think, could you exhale
without inhaling? Would it feel good? Or could you just inhale? We want
things to be permanent but they can’t be, it’s impossible. Once the
breath has come in, it must go out. When it’s gone out it comes back in
again, and that’s natural, isn’t it? Having been born we get old and
then die, and that’s totally natural and normal. It’s because conditions
have done their job, because the in-breaths and out-breaths have
alternated in this way, that the human race is still here today.

As soon as we are born we are dead. Our birth and our death are just one
thing. It’s like a tree: when there’s a root there must be branches,
when there are branches there must be a root. You can’t have one without
the other. It’s a little funny to see how at death, people are so
grief-stricken and distracted and at birth, how happy and delighted.
It’s delusion, nobody has ever looked at this clearly. I think if you
really want to cry it would be better to do so when someone’s born.
Birth is death, death is birth; the branch is the root, the root is the
branch. If you must cry, cry at the root, cry at the birth. Look
closely: if there was no birth there would be no death. Can you
understand this?

Don’t worry about things too much, just think ‘this is the way things
are.’ This is your work, your duty. Right now nobody can help you,
there’s nothing that your family and possessions can do for you. All
that can help you now is clear awareness.

So don’t waver. Let go. Throw it all away.

Even if you don’t let go, everything is starting to leave you anyway.
Can you see how all the different parts of your body are trying to slip
away? Take your hair; when you were young it was thick and black. Now
it’s falling out. It’s leaving. Your eyes used to be good and strong but
now they’re weak, your sight is unclear. When your organs have had
enough they leave, this isn’t their home. When you were a child your
teeth were healthy and firm, now they’re wobbly, or you’ve got false
ones. Your eyes, ears, nose, tongue – everything is trying to leave
because this isn’t their home. You can’t make a permanent home in
conditions, you can only stay for a short time and then you have to go.
It’s like a tenant watching over his tiny little house with failing
eyes. His teeth aren’t so good, his eyes aren’t so good, his body’s not
so healthy, everything is leaving.

So you needn’t worry about anything because this isn’t your real home,
it’s only a temporary shelter. Having come into this world you should
contemplate its nature. Everything there is is preparing to disappear.
Look at your body. Is there anything there that’s still in its original
form? Is your skin as it used to be? Is your hair? They aren’t the same,
are they? Where has everything gone? This is nature, the way things are.
When their time is up, conditions go their way. In this world there is
nothing to rely on – it’s an endless round of disturbance and trouble,
pleasure and pain. There’s no peace.

When we have no real home we’re like aimless travellers out on the road,
going here and there, stopping for a while and then setting off again.
Until we return to our real homes we feel uneasy, just like a villager
who’s left his village. Only when he gets home can he really relax and
be at peace.

Nowhere in the world is there any real peace to be found. The poor have
no peace and neither do the rich; adults have no peace and neither do
the highly educated. There’s no peace anywhere, that’s the nature of the
world. Those who have few possessions suffer, and so do those who have
many. Children, adults, old and young … everyone suffers. The suffering
of being old, the suffering of being young, the suffering of being
wealthy and the suffering of being poor – it’s all nothing but
suffering.

When you’ve contemplated things in this way you’ll see *aniccaṃ*,
impermanence, and *dukkhaṃ,* unsatisfactoriness. Why are things
impermanent and unsatisfactory? Because they are *anattā,* not-self.

Both your body that is lying sick and in pain, and the mind that is
aware of its sickness and pain, are called dhamma. That which is
formless, the thoughts, feelings and perceptions, is called
*nāmadhamma.* That which is racked with aches and pains is called
*rūpadhamma.* The material is dhamma and the immaterial is dhamma. So we
live with dhamma, in dhamma, and we are dhamma. In truth there is no
self to be found, there are only dhammas continually arising and passing
away as is their nature. Every single moment we’re undergoing birth and
death. This is the way things are.

When we think of the Lord Buddha, how truly he spoke, we feel how worthy
he is of reverence and respect. Whenever we see the truth of something
we see his teachings, even if we’ve never actually practised the Dhamma.
But even if we have a knowledge of the teachings, have studied and
practised them, as long as we still haven’t seen the truth we are still
homeless.

So understand this point. All people, all creatures, are preparing to
leave. When beings have lived an appropriate time they must go on their
way. Rich, poor, young and old must all experience this change.

When you realize that’s the way the world is you’ll feel that it’s a
wearisome place. When you see that there’s nothing real or substantial
you can rely on you’ll feel wearied and disenchanted. Being disenchanted
doesn’t mean you are averse; the mind is clear. It sees that there’s
nothing to be done to remedy this state of affairs, it’s just the way
the world is. Knowing in this way you can let go of attachment; you can
let go with a mind that is neither happy nor sad, but at peace with
conditions through seeing their changing nature with wisdom. *Aniccā
vata saṅkhārā* – all conditions are impermanent.

To put it simply, impermanence is the Buddha. If we truly see an
impermanent condition, we’ll see that it’s permanent. It’s permanent in
the sense that its subjection to change is unchanging. This is the
permanence that living beings possess. There is continual
transformation, from childhood through to old age, and that very
impermanence, that propensity to change, is permanent and fixed. If you
look at it like this your heart will be at ease. It’s not just you who
has to go through this, everyone has to.

When you consider things in this way you’ll see them as wearisome, and
disenchantment will arise. Your delight in the world of sense pleasures
will disappear. You’ll see that if you have many possessions, you have
to leave a lot behind. If you have a few, you leave few behind. Wealth
is just wealth, long life is just long life; they’re nothing special.

What is important is that we should do as the Lord Buddha taught and
build our own home, building it by the method that I’ve been explaining
to you. Build your own home. Let go. Let go until the mind reaches the
peace that is free from advancing, free from retreating and free from
stopping still. Pleasure is not your home, pain is not your home.
Pleasure and pain both decline and pass away.

The great teacher saw that all conditions are impermanent and so he
taught us to let go of our attachment to them. When we reach the end of
our life we’ll have no choice anyway, we won’t be able to take anything
with us. So wouldn’t it be better to put things down before then?
They’re just a heavy burden to carry around, why not throw off that load
now? Why bother to drag these things around? Let go, relax, and let your
family look after you.

Those who nurse the sick grow in goodness and virtue. The patient who is
giving others that opportunity shouldn’t make things difficult for them.
If there’s pain or some problem or other, let them know and keep the
mind in a wholesome state. One who is nursing parents should fill his or
her mind with warmth and kindness and not get caught up in aversion.
This is the one time you can repay your debt to them. From your birth
through your childhood, as you’ve grown up, you’ve been dependent on
your parents. That you are here today is because your mother and father
have helped you in so many ways. You owe them an incredible debt of
gratitude.

So today, all of you children and relatives gathered together here,
observe how your mother has become your child. Before you were her
children, now she has become yours. She has become older and older until
she has become a child again. Her memory goes, her eyes don’t see well
and her ears aren’t so good. Sometimes she garbles her words. Don’t let
it upset you. You who are nursing the sick must know how to let go also.
Don’t hold onto things, just let her have her own way. When a young
child is disobedient sometimes the parents let it have its own way just
to keep the peace, just to make it happy. Now your mother is just like
that child. Her memories and perceptions are confused. Sometimes she
muddles up your names, or asks you to bring a cup when she wants a
plate. It’s normal, don’t be upset by it.

Let the patient bear in mind the kindness of those who nurse and
patiently endure the painful feelings. Exert yourself mentally, don’t
let the mind become scattered and confused, and don’t make things
difficult for those looking after you. Let those who are nursing fill
their minds with virtue and kindness. Don’t be averse to the
unattractive side of the job, cleaning up the mucous and phlegm, urine
and excrement. Try your best. Everyone in the family give a hand.

She is the only mother you have. She gave you life, she has been your
teacher, your doctor and your nurse – she’s been everything to you. That
she has brought you up, shared her wealth with you and made you her heir
is the great goodness of parents. That is why the Buddha taught the
virtues of *kataññū* and *katavedī*, knowing our debt of gratitude and
trying to repay it. These two dhammas are complimentary. If our parents
are in need, unwell or in difficulty, then we do our best to help them.
This is *kataññū-katavedī*, the virtue that sustains the world. It
prevents families from breaking up, and makes them stable and
harmonious.

Today I have brought you the gift of Dhamma in this time of illness. I
have no material things to offer you, there seem to be plenty of those
in this house already. And so I give you the Dhamma, something which has
lasting worth, something which you’ll never be able to exhaust. Having
received it you can pass it on to as many others as you like and it will
never be depleted. That is the nature of Truth. I am happy to have been
able to give you this gift of Dhamma and hope it will give you the
strength to deal with your pain.
