Making the Heart Good
=====================

\<span class="dropcaps-first"\>T\</span\>\<span
class="dropcaps-words"\>hese days people\</span\> are going all over the
place looking for merit.[^1] And they always seem to stop over in Wat
Pah Pong. If they don’t stop over on the way, they stop over on the
return journey. Wat Pah Pong has become a stop-over point. Some people
are in such a hurry I don’t even get a chance to see or speak to them.
Most of them are looking for merit. I don’t see many looking for a way
out of wrongdoing. They’re so intent on getting merit they don’t know
where they’re going to put it. It’s like trying to dye a dirty, unwashed
cloth.

Monks talk straight like this, but it’s hard for most people to put this
sort of teaching into practice. It’s hard because they don’t understand.
If they understood it would be much easier. Suppose there was a hole,
and there was something at the bottom of it. Now anyone who put their
hand into the hole and didn’t reach the bottom would say the hole was
too deep. Out of a hundred or a thousand people putting their hands down
that hole, they’d all say the hole was too deep. Not one would say their
arm was too short!

There are so many people looking for merit. Sooner or later they’ll have
to start looking for a way out of wrongdoing. But not many people are
interested in this. The teaching of the Buddha is so brief, but most
people just pass it by, just like they pass through Wat Pah Pong. For
most people that’s what the Dhamma is, a stop-over point.

Only three words, hardly anything to it: : refraining from all
wrongdoing. That’s the teaching of all Buddhas. This is the heart of
Buddhism. But people keep jumping over it, they don’t want this one. The
renunciation of all wrongdoing, great and small, from bodily, verbal and
mental actions – this is the teaching of the Buddhas.

If we were to dye a piece of cloth we’d have to wash it first. But most
people don’t do that. Without looking at the cloth, they dip it into the
dye straight away. If the cloth is dirty, dying it makes it come out
even worse than before. Think about it. Dying a dirty old rag, would
that look good?

You see? This is how Buddhism teaches, but most people just pass it by.
They just want to perform good works, but they don’t want to give up
wrongdoing. It’s just like saying ‘the hole is too deep.’ Everybody says
the hole is too deep, nobody says their arm is too short. We have to
come back to ourselves. With this teaching you have to take a step back
and look at yourself.

Sometimes they go looking for merit by the bus load. Maybe they even
argue on the bus, or they’re drunk. Ask them where they’re going and
they say they’re looking for merit. They want merit but they don’t give
up vice. They’ll never find merit that way.

This is how people are. You have to look closely, look at yourselves.
The Buddha taught about having recollection and self-awareness in all
situations. Wrongdoing arises in bodily, verbal and mental actions. The
source of all good, evil, wellbeing and harm lies with actions, speech
and thoughts. Did you bring your actions, speech and thoughts with you
today? Or have you left them at home? This is where you must look, right
here. You don’t have to look very far away. Look at your actions, speech
and thoughts. Look to see if your conduct is faulty or not.

People don’t really look at these things. Like the housewife washing the
dishes with a scowl on her face. She’s so intent on cleaning the dishes,
she doesn’t realize her own mind’s dirty! Have you ever seen this? She
only sees the dishes. She’s looking too far away, isn’t she? Some of you
have probably experienced this, I’d say. This is where you have to look.
People concentrate on cleaning the dishes but they let their minds go
dirty. This is not good, they’re forgetting themselves.

Because they don’t see themselves people can commit all sorts of bad
deeds. They don’t look at their own minds. When people are going to do
something bad they have to look around first to see if anyone is
looking. ‘Will my mother see me?’ ‘Will my husband see me?’ ‘Will my
children see me?’ ‘Will my wife see me?’ If there’s no-one watching then
they go right ahead and do it. This is insulting themselves. They say
no-one is watching, so they quickly finish the job before anyone will
see. And what about themselves? Aren’t they a ‘somebody’?

You see? Because they overlook themselves like this, people never find
what is of real value, they don’t find the Dhamma. If you look at
yourselves you will see yourselves. Whenever you are about to do
something bad, if you see yourself in time you can stop. If you want to
do something worthwhile, look at your mind. If you know how to look at
yourself then you’ll know about right and wrong, harm and benefit, vice
and virtue. These are the things we should know about.

If I don’t talk of these things you won’t know about them. You have
greed and delusion in the mind but don’t know it. You won’t know
anything if you are always looking outside. This is the trouble with
people not looking at themselves. Looking inwards you will see good and
evil. Seeing goodness, we can take it to heart and practise accordingly.

Giving up the bad, practising the good; this is the heart of Buddhism. –
not committing any wrongdoing, either through body, speech or mind.
That’s the right practice, the teaching of the Buddhas. Now ‘our cloth’
is clean.

Then we have – making the mind virtuous and skilful. If the mind is
virtuous and skilful we don’t have to take a bus all over the
countryside looking for merit. Even sitting at home we can attain to
merit. But most people just go looking for merit all over the
countryside without giving up their vices. When they return home it’s
empty-handed they go, back to their old sour faces. There they are
washing the dishes with a sour face, so intent on cleaning the dishes.
This is where people don’t look, they’re far away from merit.

We may know of these things, but we don’t really know if we don’t know
within our own minds. Buddhism doesn’t enter our heart. If our mind is
good and virtuous it is happy. There’s a smile in our heart. But most of
us can hardly find time to smile, can we? We can only manage to smile
when things go our way. Most people’s happiness depends on having things
go to their liking. They have to have everybody in the world say only
pleasant things. Is that how you find happiness? Is it possible to have
everybody in the world say only pleasant things? If that’s how it is
when will you ever find happiness?

We must use Dhamma to find happiness. Whatever it may be, whether right
or wrong, don’t blindly cling to it. Just notice it then lay it down.
When the mind is at ease then you can smile. The minute you become
averse to something the mind goes bad. Then nothing is good at all.

: Having cleared away impurities the mind is free of worries; it is
peaceful, kind and virtuous. When the mind is radiant and has given up
evil, there is ease at all times. The serene and peaceful mind is the
true epitome of human achievement.

When others say things to our liking, we smile. If they say things that
displease us we frown. How can we ever get others to say things only to
our liking every single day? Is it possible? Even your own children,
have they ever said things that displease you? Have you ever upset your
parents? Not only other people, but even our own minds can upset us.
Sometimes the things we ourselves think of are not pleasant. What can
you do? You might be walking along and suddenly kick a tree stump …
*thud!* … ‘Ouch!’ … Where’s the problem? Who kicked who anyway? Who are
you going to blame? It’s your own fault. Even our own mind can be
displeasing to us. If you think about it, you’ll see that this is true.
Sometimes we do things that even we don’t like. All you can say is
‘Damn!’ There’s no-one else to blame.

Gaining merit or boon in Buddhism is giving up that which is wrong. When
we abandon wrongness, then we are no longer wrong. When there is no
stress there is calm. The calm mind is a clean mind, one which harbours
no angry thoughts, one which is clear.

How can you make the mind clear? Just by knowing it. For example, you
might think, ‘Today I’m in a really bad mood, everything I look at
offends me, even the plates in the cupboard.’ You might feel like
smashing them up, every single one of them. Whatever you look at looks
bad, the chickens – the ducks, the cats and dogs … you hate them all.
Everything your husband says is offensive. Even looking into your own
mind you aren’t satisfied. What can you do in such a situation? Where
does this suffering come from? This is called ‘having no merit’. These
days in Thailand they have a saying that when someone dies his merit is
finished. But that’s not the case. There are plenty of people still
alive who’ve finished their merit already; those people who don’t know
merit. The bad mind just collects more and more badness.

Going on these merit-making tours is like building a beautiful house
without preparing the area beforehand. In no long time the house will
collapse, won’t it? The design was no good. Now you have to try again,
try a different way. You have to look into yourself, looking at the
faults in your actions, speech and thoughts. Where else are you going to
practise, other than at your actions, speech and thoughts? People get
lost. They want to go and practise Dhamma where it’s really peaceful, in
the forest or at Wat Pah Pong. Is Wat Pah Pong peaceful? No, it’s not
really peaceful. Where it’s really peaceful is in your own home.

If you have wisdom wherever you go you will be carefree. The whole world
is already just fine as it is. All the trees in the forest are already
just fine as they are: there are tall ones, short ones, hollow ones …
all kinds. They are simply the way they are. Through ignorance of their
true nature we go and force our opinions onto them. ‘Oh, this tree is
too short! This tree is hollow!’ Those trees are simply trees, they’re
better off than we are.

That’s why I’ve had these little poems written up in the trees here. Let
the trees teach you. Have you learned anything from them yet? You should
try to learn at least one thing from them. There are so many trees, all
with something to teach you. Dhamma is everywhere, it is in everything
in nature. You should understand this point. Don’t go blaming the hole
for being too deep; turn around and look at your own arm! If you can see
this you will be happy.

If you make merit or virtue, preserve it in your mind. That’s the best
place to keep it. Making merit as you have done today is good, but it’s
not the best way. Constructing buildings is good, but it’s not the best
thing. Building your own mind into something good is the best way. This
way you will find goodness whether you come here or stay at home. Find
this excellence within your mind. Outer structures like this hall here
are just like the ‘bark’ of the ‘tree’, they’re not the ‘heartwood’.

If you have wisdom, wherever you look there will be Dhamma. If you lack
wisdom, then even the good things turn bad. Where does this badness come
from? Just from our own minds, that’s where. Look how this mind changes.
Everything changes. Husband and wife used to get on all right together,
they could talk to each other quite happily. But there comes a day when
their mood goes bad, everything the spouse says seems offensive. The
mind has gone bad, it’s changed again. This is how it is.

So in order to give up evil and cultivate the good you don’t have to go
looking anywhere else. If your mind has gone bad, don’t go looking over
at this person and that person. Just look at your own mind and find out
where these thoughts come from. Why does the mind think such things?
Understand that all things are transient. Love is transient, hate is
transient. Have you ever loved your children? Of course you have. Have
you ever hated them? I’ll answer that for you, too. Sometimes you do,
don’t you? Can you throw them away? No, you can’t throw them away. Why
not? Children aren’t like bullets, are they?[^2] Bullets are fired
outwards, but children are fired right back to the parents. If they’re
bad it comes back to the parents. You could say children are your There
are good ones and bad ones. Both good and bad are right there in your
children. But even the bad ones are precious. One may be born with
polio, crippled and deformed, and be even more precious than the others.
Whenever you leave home for a while you have to leave a message, ‘Look
after the little one, he’s not so strong.’ You love him even more than
the others.

You should, then, set your minds well – half love, half hate. Don’t take
only one or the other, always have both sides in mind. Your children are
your kamma, they are appropriate to their owners. They are your kamma,
so you must take responsibility for them. If they really give you
suffering, just remind yourself, ‘It’s my kamma.’ If they please you,
just remind yourself, ‘It’s my kamma.’ Sometimes it gets so frustrating
at home you must just want to run away. It gets so bad some people even
contemplate hanging themselves! It’s kamma. We have to accept the fact.
Avoid bad actions, then you will be able to see yourself more clearly.

This is why contemplating things is so important. usually when people
practise meditation they use a meditation object, such as *Bud-dho*,
*Dham-mo* or *Saṅ-gho*. But you can make it even shorter than this.
Whenever you feel annoyed, whenever your mind goes bad, just say ‘so!’
When you feel better just say ‘so! It’s not a sure thing.’ If you love
someone, just say ‘so!’ When you feel you’re getting angry, just say
‘so!’ Do you understand? You don’t have to go looking into the Just
‘so!’ This means ‘it’s transient’. Love is transient, hate is transient,
good is transient, evil is transient. How could they be permanent? Where
is there any permanence in them?

=1 You could say that they are permanent insofar as they are invariably
impermanent. They are certain in this respect, they never become
otherwise. One minute there’s love, the next hate. That’s how things
are. In this sense they are permanent. That’s why I say whenever love
arises, just tell it ‘so!’ It saves a lot of time. You don’t have to say
’ If you don’t want a long meditation theme, just take this simple word.
If love arises, before you get really lost in it, just tell yourself
‘so!’ This is enough.

Everything is transient, and it’s permanent in that it’s invariably that
way. Just to see this much is to see the heart of the Dhamma, the true
Dhamma.

Now if everybody said ‘so!’ more often, and applied themselves to
training like this, clinging would become less and less. People would
not be so stuck on love and hate. They would not cling to things. They
would put their trust in the truth, not with other things. Just to know
this much is enough, what else do you need to know?

Having heard the teaching, you should try to remember it also. What
should you remember? Meditate … Do you understand? If you understand,
the Dhamma clicks with you, the mind will stop. If there is anger in the
mind, just ‘so!’ That’s enough, it stops straight away. If you don’t yet
understand look deeply into the matter. If there is understanding, when
anger arises in the mind you can just shut it off with ‘so! It’s
impermanent!’

Today you have had a chance to record the Dhamma both inwardly and
outwardly. Inwardly, the sound enters through the ears to be recorded in
the mind. If you can’t do this much it’s not so good, your time at Wat
Pah Pong will be wasted. Record it outwardly, and record it inwardly.
This tape recorder here is not so important. The really important thing
is the ‘recorder’ in the mind. The tape recorder is perishable, but if
the Dhamma really reaches the mind it’s imperishable, it’s there for
good. And you don’t have to waste money on batteries.

[^1]: ‘Looking for merit’ is a commonly-used Thai phrase. It refers to
    the custom in Thailand of going to monasteries, or ‘wats’, paying
    respect to venerated teachers and making offerings.

[^2]: There is a play on words here between the Thai words ‘*look*’,
    meaning children, and ‘*look bpeun*’, meaning literally ‘gun
    children’ … that is, bullets.
