The Path to Peace
=================

<span class="dropcaps-first" markdown="1">T</span><span
class="dropcaps-words" markdown="1">oday I will give</span>&nbsp; a
teaching particularly for you as monks and novices, so please determine
your hearts and minds to listen. There is nothing else for us to talk
about other than the practice of the Dhamma-Vinaya.

Every one of you should clearly understand that now you have been
ordained as Buddhist monks and novices and should be conducting
yourselves appropriately. We have all experienced the lay life, which is
characterized by confusion and a lack of formal Dhamma practice; now,
having taken up the form of a Buddhist *‘samaṇa’,* some fundamental
changes have to take place in our minds so that we differ from laypeople
in the way we think. We must try to make all of our speech and actions –
eating and drinking, moving around, coming and going – befitting for one
who has been ordained as a spiritual seeker, who the Buddha referred to
as a ‘*samaṇa*’. What he meant was someone who is calm and restrained.
Formerly, as laypeople, we didn’t understand what it meant to be a
*samaṇa*, to have a sense of peacefulness and restraint. We gave full
licence to our bodies and minds to have fun and games under the
influence of craving and defilement. When we experienced pleasant
*ārammaṇa,* these would put us into a good mood, unpleasant mind-objects
would put us into a bad one – this is the way it is when we are caught
in the power of mind-objects. The Buddha said that those who are still
under the sway of mind-objects aren’t looking after themselves. They are
without a refuge, a true abiding place, and so they let their minds
follow moods of sensual indulgence and pleasure-seeking and get caught
into suffering, sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief and despair. They don’t
know how or when to stop and reflect upon their experience.

In Buddhism, once we have received ordination and taken up the life of
the *samaṇa*, we have to adjust our physical appearance in accordance
with the external form of the *samaṇa*: we shave our heads, trim our
nails and don the brown bhikkhus’ robes – the banner of the Noble Ones:
the Buddha and the Arahants. We are indebted to the Buddha for the
wholesome foundations he established and handed down to us, which allow
us to live as monks and find adequate support. Our lodgings were built
and offered as a result of the wholesome actions of those with faith in
the Buddha and his teachings. We do not have to prepare our food because
we are benefiting from the roots laid down by the Buddha. Similarly, we
have inherited the medicines, robes and all the other requisites that we
use from the Buddha. Once ordained as Buddhist monastics, on the
conventional level we are called monks and given the title
‘Venerable’;[^1] but simply having taken on the external appearance of
monks does not make us truly venerable. Being monks on the conventional
level means we are monks as far as our physical appearance goes. Simply
by shaving our heads and putting on brown robes we are called
‘Venerable’, but that which is truly worthy of veneration has not yet
arisen within us – we are still only ‘Venerable’ in name. It’s the same
as when they mould cement or cast brass into a Buddha image. They call
it a Buddha, but it isn’t really that. It’s just metal, wood, wax or
stone. That’s the way conventional reality is.

It’s the same for us. Once we have been ordained, we are given the title
Venerable Bhikkhu, but that alone doesn’t make us venerable. On the
level of ultimate reality – in other words, in the mind – the term still
doesn’t apply. Our minds and hearts have still not been fully perfected
through the practice with such qualities as *mettā,* *karuṇā,* *muditā,*
and *upekkhā.* We haven’t reached full purity within. Greed, hatred and
delusion are still barring the way, not allowing that which is worthy of
veneration to arise.

Our practice is to begin destroying greed, hatred and delusion –
defilements which for the most part can be found within each and every
one of us. These are what hold us in the round of becoming and birth and
prevent us from achieving peace of mind. Greed, hatred and delusion
prevent the *samaṇa* – peacefulness – from arising within us. As long as
this peace does not arise, we are still not *samaṇa*; in other words,
our hearts have not experienced the peace that is free from the
influence of greed, hatred and delusion. This is why we practise – with
the intention of expunging greed, hatred and delusion from our hearts.
It is only when these defilements have been removed that we can reach
purity, that which is truly venerable.

Internalising that which is venerable within your heart doesn’t involve
working only with the mind, but your body and speech as well. They have
to work together. Before you can practise with your body and speech, you
must be practising with your mind. However, if you simply practise with
the mind, neglecting body and speech, that won’t work either. They are
inseparable. Practising with the mind until it’s smooth, refined and
beautiful is similar to producing a finished wooden pillar or plank:
before you can obtain a pillar that is smooth, varnished and attractive,
you must first go and cut a tree down. Then you must cut off the rough
parts – the roots and branches – before you split it, saw it and work
it. Practising with the mind is the same as working with the tree; you
have to work with the coarse things first. You have to destroy the rough
parts. You have to destroy the roots, destroy the bark and everything
which is unattractive, in order to obtain that which is attractive and
pleasing to the eye. You have to work through the rough to reach the
smooth. Dhamma practice is just the same. You aim to pacify and purify
the mind, but it’s difficult to do. You have to begin practising with
externals – body and speech – working your way inwards until you reach
that which is smooth, shining and beautiful. You can compare it with a
finished piece of furniture, such as these tables and chairs. They may
be attractive now, but once they were just rough bits of wood with
branches and leaves, which had to be planed and worked with. This is the
way you obtain furniture that is beautiful or a mind that is perfect and
pure.

Therefore the right path to peace, the path the Buddha laid down, which
leads to peace of mind and the pacification of the defilements, is sīla,
samādhi and paññā. This is the path of practice. It is the path that
leads you to purity and leads you to realize and embody the qualities of
the *samaṇa*. It is the way to the complete abandonment of greed, hatred
and delusion. The practice does not differ from this whether you view it
internally or externally.

This way of training and maturing the mind – which involves chanting,
meditation, Dhamma talks and all the other parts of the practice –
forces you to go against the grain of the defilements. You have to go
against the tendencies of the mind, because normally we like to take
things easy, to be lazy and to avoid anything which causes us friction
or involves suffering and difficulty. The mind simply doesn’t want to
make the effort or get involved. This is why you have to be ready to
endure hardship and bring forth effort in the practice. You have to use
the Dhamma of endurance and really struggle. Previously your bodies were
simply vehicles for having fun, and having built up all sorts of
unskilful habits it’s difficult for you to start practising with them.
Before, you didn’t restrain your speech, so now it’s hard to start
restraining it. But as with that wood, it doesn’t matter how troublesome
or hard it seems. Before you can make it into tables and chairs, you
have to encounter some difficulty. That’s not the important thing; it’s
just something you have to experience along the way. You have to work
through the rough wood to produce the finished pieces of furniture.

The Buddha taught that this is the way the practice is for all of us.
All of his disciples who had finished their work and become fully
enlightened, had, (when they first came to take ordination and practise
with him) previously been *puthujjana.* They had all been ordinary
unenlightened beings like ourselves, with arms and legs, eyes and ears,
greed and anger – just the same as us. They didn’t have any special
characteristics that made them particularly different from us. This was
how both the Buddha and his disciples had been in the beginning. They
practised and brought forth enlightenment from the unenlightened, beauty
from ugliness and great benefit from that which was virtually useless.
This work has continued through successive generations right up to the
present day. It is the children of ordinary people – farmers, traders
and businessmen – who, having previously been entangled in the sensual
pleasures of the world, go forth to take ordination. Those monks at the
time of the Buddha were able to practise and train themselves, and you
must understand that you have the same potential. You are made up of the
five *khandhā,* just the same. You also have a body, pleasant and
unpleasant feelings, memory and perception, thought formations and
consciousness – as well as a wandering and proliferating mind. You can
be aware of good and evil. Everything’s just the same. In the end, that
combination of physical and mental phenomena present in each of you, as
separate individuals, differs little from that found in those monastics
who practised and became enlightened under the Buddha. They had all
started out as ordinary, unenlightened beings. Some had even been
gangsters and delinquents, while others were from good backgrounds. They
were no different from us. The Buddha inspired them to go forth and
practise for the attainment of *magga* (the Noble Path) and *phala*
(fruition), and these days, in similar fashion, people like yourselves
are inspired to take up the practice of sīla, samādhi and paññā.

Sīla, samādhi and paññā are the names given to the different aspects of
the practice. When you practise sīla, samādhi and paññā, it means you
practise with yourselves. Right practice takes place here within you.
Right sīla exists here, right samādhi exists here. Why? Because your
body is right here. The practice of sīla involves every part of the
body. The Buddha taught us to be careful of all our physical actions.
Your body exists here! You have hands, you have legs right here. This is
where you practise sīla. Whether your actions will be in accordance with
sīla and Dhamma depends on how you train your body. Practising with your
speech means being aware of the things you say. It includes avoiding
wrong kinds of speech, namely divisive speech, coarse speech and
unnecessary or frivolous speech. Wrong bodily actions include killing
living beings, stealing and sexual misconduct.

It’s easy to reel off the list of wrong kinds of behaviour as found in
the books, but the important thing to understand is that the potential
for them all lies within us. Your body and speech are with you right
here and now. You practise moral restraint, which means taking care to
avoid the unskilful actions of killing, stealing and sexual misconduct.
The Buddha taught us to take care with our actions from the very
coarsest level. In lay life you might not have had very refined moral
conduct and frequently transgressed the precepts. For instance, in the
past you may have killed animals or insects by smashing them with an axe
or a fist, or perhaps you didn’t take much care with your speech: false
speech means lying or exaggerating the truth; coarse speech means you
are constantly being abusive or rude to others – ‘you scum,’ ‘you
idiot,’ and so on; frivolous speech means aimless chatter, foolishly
rambling on without purpose or substance. We’ve indulged in it all. No
restraint! In short, keeping sīla means watching over yourself, watching
over your actions and speech.

So who will do the watching over? Who will take responsibility for your
actions? When you kill an animal, who is the one who knows? Is your hand
the one who knows, or is it someone else? When you steal someone else’s
property, who is aware of the act? Is your hand the one who knows? This
is where you have to develop awareness. Before you commit some act of
sexual misconduct, where is your awareness? Is your body the one who
knows? Who is the one who knows before you lie, swear or say something
frivolous? Is your mouth aware of what it says, or is the one who knows
in the words themselves? Contemplate this: whoever it is who knows is
the one who has to take responsibility for your sīla. Bring that
awareness to watch over your actions and speech. That knowing, that
awareness is what you use to watch over your practice. To keep sīla, you
use that part of the mind which directs your actions and which leads you
to do good and bad. You catch the villain and transform him into a
sheriff or a mayor. Take hold of the wayward mind and bring it to serve
and take responsibility for all your actions and speech. Look at this
and contemplate it. The Buddha taught us to take care with our actions.
Who is it who does the taking care? The body doesn’t know anything; it
just stands, walks around and so on. The hands are the same; they don’t
know anything. Before they touch or take hold of anything, there has to
be someone who gives them orders. As they pick things up and put them
down there has to be someone telling them what to do. The hands
themselves aren’t aware of anything; there has to be someone giving them
orders. The mouth is the same – whatever it says, whether it tells the
truth or lies, is rude or divisive, there must be someone telling it
what to say.

The practice involves establishing sati, mindfulness, within this ‘one
who knows’. The ‘one who knows’ is that intention of mind, which
previously motivated us to kill living beings, steal other people’s
property, indulge in illicit sex, lie, slander, say foolish and
frivolous things and engage in all kinds of unrestrained behaviour. The
‘one who knows’ led us to speak. It exists within the mind. Focus your
mindfulness or sati – that constant recollectedness – on this ‘one who
knows’. Let the knowing look after your practice.

In practice, the most basic guidelines for moral conduct stipulated by
the Buddha were: to kill is evil, a transgression of sīla; stealing is a
transgression; sexual misconduct is a transgression; lying is a
transgression; vulgar and frivolous speech are all transgressions of
sīla. Commit all this to memory. It’s the code of moral discipline, as
laid down by the Buddha, which encourages you to be careful of that one
inside of you who was responsible for previous transgressions of the
moral precepts. That one, who was responsible for giving the orders to
kill or hurt others, to steal, to have illicit sex, to say untrue or
unskilful things and to be unrestrained in all sorts of ways – singing
and dancing, partying and fooling around. The one who was giving the
orders to indulge in all these sorts of behaviour is the one you bring
to look after the mind. Use sati or awareness to keep the mind
recollecting in the present moment and maintain mental composure in this
way. Make the mind look after itself. Do it well.

If the mind is really able to look after itself, it is not so difficult
to guard speech and actions, since they are all supervised by the mind.
Keeping sīla – in other words taking care of your actions and speech –
is not such a difficult thing. You sustain awareness at every moment and
in every posture, whether standing, walking, sitting or lying down.
Before you perform any action, speak or engage in conversation,
establish awareness first – don’t act or speak first, establish
mindfulness first and then act or speak. You must have sati, be
recollecting, before you do anything. It doesn’t matter what you are
going to say, you must first be recollecting in the mind. Practise like
this until you are fluent. Practise so that you can keep abreast of
what’s going on in the mind to the point where mindfulness becomes
effortless and you are mindful before you act, mindful before you speak.
This is the way you establish mindfulness in the heart. It is with the
‘one who knows’ that you look after yourself, because all your actions
spring from here.

This is where the intentions for all your actions originate and this is
why the practice won’t work if you try to bring in someone else to do
the job. The mind has to look after itself; if it can’t take care of
itself, nothing else can. This is why the Buddha taught that keeping
sīla is not that difficult, because it simply means looking after your
own mind. If mindfulness is fully established, whenever you say or do
something harmful to yourself or others, you will know straight away.
You know that which is right and that which is wrong. This is the way
you keep sīla. You practise with your body and speech from the most
basic level.

By guarding your speech and actions they become graceful and pleasing to
the eye and ear, while you yourself remain comfortable and at ease
within the restraint. All your behaviour, manners, movements and speech
become beautiful, because you are taking care to reflect upon, adjust
and correct your behaviour. You can compare this with your dwelling
place or the meditation hall. If you are regularly cleaning and looking
after your dwelling place, then both the interior and the area around it
will be pleasant to look at, rather than a messy eyesore. This is
because there is someone looking after it. Your actions and speech are
similar. If you are taking care with them, they become beautiful, and
that which is evil or dirty will be prevented from arising.

*Ādikalyāṇa, majjhekalyāṇa, pariyosānakalyāṇa*: beautiful in the
beginning, beautiful in the middle and beautiful in the end; or
harmonious in the beginning, harmonious in the middle and harmonious in
the end. What does that mean? Precisely that the practice of sīla,
samādhi and paññā is beautiful. The practice is beautiful in the
beginning. If the beginning is beautiful, it follows that the middle
will be beautiful. If you practise mindfulness and restraint until it
becomes comfortable and natural to you – so that there is a constant
vigilance – the mind will become firm and resolute in the practice of
sīla and restraint. It will be consistently paying attention to the
practice and thus become concentrated. That characteristic of being firm
and unshakeable in the monastic form and discipline, and unwavering in
the practice of mindfulness and restraint can be referred to as samādhi.

That aspect of the practice characterized by a continuous restraint,
where you are consistently taking care with your actions and speech and
taking responsibility for all your external behaviour, is referred to as
sīla. The characteristic of being unwavering in the practice of
mindfulness and restraint is called samādhi. The mind is firmly
concentrated in this practice of sīla and restraint. Being firmly
concentrated in the practice of sīla means that there is an evenness and
consistency to the practice of mindfulness and restraint. These are the
external characteristics of samādhi used in the practice for keeping
sīla. However, it also has an inner, deeper side to it. It is essential
that you develop and maintain sīla and samādhi from the beginning – you
have to do this before anything else.

Once the mind is determined in the practice and sīla and samādhi are
firmly established, you will be able to investigate and reflect on that
which is wholesome and unwholesome – asking yourself ‘Is this right?’
‘Is that wrong?’ – as you experience different mind-objects. When the
mind makes contact with different sights, sounds, smells, tastes,
tactile sensations or ideas, the ‘one who knows’ will arise and
establish awareness of liking and disliking, happiness and suffering and
the different kinds of mind-objects that you experience. You will come
to see clearly, and see many different things.

If you are mindful, you will see the different objects which pass into
the mind and the reaction which takes place upon experiencing them. The
‘one who knows’ will automatically take them up as objects for
contemplation. Once the mind is vigilant and mindfulness is firmly
established, you will note all the reactions displayed through either
body, speech or mind, as mind-objects are experienced. That aspect of
the mind which identifies and selects the good from the bad, the right
from the wrong, from amongst all the mind-objects within your field of
awareness, is paññā. This is paññā in its initial stages and it matures
as a result of the practice. All these different aspects of the practice
arise from within the mind. The Buddha referred to these characteristics
as sīla, samādhi and paññā. This is the way they are, as practised in
the beginning.

As you continue the practice, fresh attachments and new kinds of
delusion begin to arise in the mind. This means you start clinging to
that which is good or wholesome. You become fearful of any blemishes or
faults in the mind, anxious that your samādhi will be harmed by them. At
the same time you begin to be diligent and hard working, and to love and
nurture the practice. Whenever the mind makes contact with mind-objects,
you become fearful and tense. You become aware of other people’s faults
as well, even the slightest things they do wrong. It’s because you are
concerned for your practice. This is practising sīla, samādhi and paññā
on one level – on the outside – based on the fact that you have
established your views in accordance with the form and foundations of
practice laid down by the Buddha. Indeed, these are the roots of the
practice and it is essential to have them established in the mind.

You continue to practise like this as much as possible, until you might
even reach the point where you are constantly judging and picking fault
with everyone you meet, wherever you go. You are constantly reacting
with attraction and aversion to the world around you, becoming full of
all kinds of uncertainty and continually attaching to views of the right
and wrong way to practise. It’s as if you have become obsessed with the
practice. But you don’t have to worry about this yet – at that point
it’s better to practise too much than too little. Practise a lot and
dedicate yourself to looking after body, speech and mind. You can never
really do too much of this. This is said to be practising sīla on one
level; in fact, sīla, samādhi and paññā are all in there together.

If you were to describe the practice of sīla at this stage, in terms of
*pāramī,* it would be *dāna pāramī*, or *sīla pāramī* (the spiritual
perfection of moral restraint). This is the practice on one level.
Having developed this much, you can go deeper in the practice to the
more profound level of *dāna upapāramī*[^2] and *sīla upapāramī*. These
arise out of the same spiritual qualities, but the mind is practising on
a more refined level. You simply concentrate and focus your efforts to
obtain the refined from the coarse.

Once you have gained this foundation in your practice, there will be a
strong sense of shame and fear of wrongdoing established in the heart.
Whatever the time or place – in public or in private – this fear of
wrongdoing will always be in the mind. You become really afraid of any
wrongdoing. This is a quality of mind that you maintain throughout every
aspect of the practice. The practice of mindfulness and restraint with
body, speech and mind, and the consistent distinguishing between right
and wrong is what you hold as the object of mind. You become
concentrated in this way and by firmly and unshakeably attaching to this
way of practice, the mind actually becomes sīla, samādhi and paññā – the
characteristics of the practice as described in the conventional
teachings.

As you continue to develop and maintain the practice, these different
characteristics and qualities are perfected together in the mind.
However, practising sīla, samādhi and paññā at this level is still not
enough to produce the factors of *jhāna* – the practice is still too
coarse. Still, the mind is already quite refined – on the refined side
of coarse! For an ordinary unenlightened person who has not been looking
after the mind or practised much meditation and mindfulness, just this
much is already something quite refined. It’s like to a poor person –
owning two or three pounds can mean a lot, though for a millionaire it’s
almost nothing. This is the way it is. A few quid is a lot when you’re
down and out and hard up for cash, and in the same way, even though in
the early stages of the practice you might still only be able to let go
of the coarser defilements, this can still seem quite profound to one
who is unenlightened and has never practised or let go of defilements
before. At this level, you can feel a sense of satisfaction with being
able to practise to the full extent of your ability. This is something
you will see for yourself; it’s something that has to be experienced
within the mind of the practitioner.

If this is so, it means that you are already on the path, i.e.
practising sīla, samādhi and paññā. These must be practised together;
for if any are lacking, the practice will not develop correctly. The
more your sīla improves, the firmer the mind becomes. The firmer the
mind is, the bolder paññā becomes and so on, each part of the practice
supporting and enhancing all the others. In the end, because the three
aspects of the practice are so closely related to each other, these
terms virtually become synonymous. When you are practising like this
continuously, without relaxing your effort, this is *sammā paṭipadā*
(right practice).

If you are practising in this way, it means that you have entered upon
the correct path of practice. You are travelling along the very first
stages of the path – the coarsest level – which is something quite
difficult to sustain. As you deepen and refine the practice, sīla,
samādhi and paññā will mature together from the same place – they are
refined down from the same raw material. It’s the same as our coconut
palms. The coconut palm absorbs the water from the earth and pulls it up
through the trunk. By the time the water reaches the coconut itself, it
has become clean and sweet, even though it is derived from that plain
water in the ground. The coconut palm is nourished by what are
essentially the coarse earth and water elements, which it absorbs and
purifies, and these are transformed into something far sweeter and purer
than before. In the same way, the practice of sīla, samādhi and paññā –
in other words *magga* – has coarse beginnings, but, as a result of
training and refining the mind through meditation and reflection, it
becomes increasingly subtle.

As the mind gradually becomes more refined, the practice of mindfulness
becomes more focused, being concentrated on a more and more narrow area.
The practice actually becomes easier as the mind turns more and more
inwards to focus on itself. You no longer make big mistakes or go wildly
wrong. Now, whenever the mind is affected by a particular matter, doubts
will arise – such as whether acting or speaking in a certain way is
right or wrong. Simply keep halting the mental proliferation and,
through intensifying effort in the practice, continue turning your
attention deeper and deeper inside. The practice of samādhi will become
progressively firmer and more concentrated. The practice of paññā is
then enhanced so that you can see things more clearly and with
increasing ease.

The end result is that you are clearly able to see the mind and its
objects, without having to make any distinction between the mind, body
or speech. You no longer have to separate anything at all – whether you
are talking about the mind and the body or the mind and its objects. You
see that it is the mind which gives orders to the body. The body has to
depend on the mind before it can function. However, the mind itself is
constantly subject to different objects contacting and conditioning it
before it can have any effect on the body. As you continue to turn
attention inwards and reflect on the Dhamma, the wisdom faculty
gradually matures, and eventually you are left contemplating the mind
and mind-objects – which means that you start to experience the body,
*rūpadhamma* (material), as *arūpadhamma* (immaterial). Through your
insight, you are no longer groping at or uncertain in your understanding
of the body and the way it is. The mind experiences the body’s physical
characteristics as *arūpadhamma* – formless objects – which come into
contact with the mind. Ultimately, you are contemplating just the mind
and mind-objects – those objects which come into your consciousness.

Now, examining the true nature of the mind, you can observe that in its
natural state, it has no preoccupations or issues prevailing upon it.
It’s like a piece of cloth or a flag that has been tied to the end of a
pole. As long as it’s on its own and undisturbed, nothing will happen to
it. A leaf on a tree is another example – ordinarily it remains quiet
and unperturbed. If it moves or flutters this must be due to the wind,
an external force. Normally, nothing much happens to leaves; they remain
still. They don’t go looking to get involved with anything or anybody.
When they start to move, it must be due to the influence of something
external, such as the wind, which makes them swing back and forth. In
its natural state, the mind is the same; in it there exists no loving or
hating, nor does it seek to blame other people. It is independent,
existing in a state of purity that is truly clear, radiant and
untarnished. In its pure state, the mind is peaceful, without happiness
or suffering; indeed it is not experiencing any *vedanā* (feeling) at
all. This is the true state of the mind.

The purpose of the practice, then, is to seek inwardly, searching and
investigating until you reach the original mind. The original mind is
also known as the pure mind. The pure mind is the mind without
attachment. It doesn’t get affected by mind-objects. In other words, it
doesn’t chase after the different kinds of pleasant and unpleasant
mind-objects. Rather, the mind is in a state of continuous knowing and
wakefulness – thoroughly mindful of all it is experiencing. When the
mind is like this, no pleasant or unpleasant mind-objects it experiences
will be able to disturb it. The mind doesn’t ‘become’ anything. In other
words, nothing can shake it. Why? Because there is awareness. The mind
knows itself as pure. It has evolved its own, true independence; it has
reached its original state. How is it able to bring this original state
into existence? Through the faculty of mindfulness, wisely reflecting
and seeing that all things are merely conditions arising out of the
influence of elements, without any individual being controlling them.

This is how it is with the happiness and suffering we experience. When
these mental states arise, they are just ‘happiness’ and ‘suffering’.
There is no owner of the happiness. The mind is not the owner of the
suffering – mental states do not belong to the mind. Look at it for
yourself. In reality these are not affairs of the mind, they are
separate and distinct. Happiness is just the state of happiness;
suffering is just the state of suffering. You are merely the knower of
these. In the past, because the roots of greed, hatred and delusion
already existed in the mind, whenever you caught sight of the slightest
pleasant or unpleasant mind-object, the mind would react immediately –
you would take hold of it and have to experience either happiness or
suffering. You would be continuously indulging in states of happiness
and suffering. That’s the way it is as long as the mind doesn’t know
itself – as long as it’s not bright and illuminated. The mind is not
free. It is influenced by whatever mind-objects it experiences. In other
words, it is without a refuge, unable to truly depend on itself. You
receive a pleasant mental impression and get into a good mood. The mind
forgets itself.

In contrast, the original mind is beyond good and bad. This is the
original nature of the mind. If you feel happy over experiencing a
pleasant mind-object, that is delusion. If you feel unhappy over
experiencing an unpleasant mind-object, that is delusion. Unpleasant
mind-objects make you suffer and pleasant ones make you happy – this is
the world. Mind-objects come with the world. They are the world. They
give rise to happiness and suffering, good and evil, and everything that
is subject to impermanence and uncertainty. When you separate from the
original mind, everything becomes uncertain – there is just unending
birth and death, uncertainty and apprehensiveness, suffering and
hardship, without any way of halting it or bringing it to cessation.
This is *vaṭṭa.*

Through wise reflection, you can see that you are subject to old habits
and conditioning. The mind itself is actually free, but you have to
suffer because of your attachments. Take, for example, praise and
criticism. Suppose other people say you are stupid; why does that cause
you to suffer? It’s because you feel that you are being criticized. You
‘pick up’ this bit of information and fill the mind with it. The act of
‘picking up’, accumulating and receiving that knowledge without full
mindfulness, gives rise to an experience that is like stabbing yourself.
This is *upādāna.* Once you have been stabbed, there is *bhava.* *Bhava*
is the cause for *jāti* (birth). If you train yourself not to take any
notice of or attach importance to some of the things other people say,
merely treating them as sounds contacting your ears, there won’t be any
strong reaction and you won’t have to suffer, as nothing is created in
the mind. It would be like listening to a Cambodian scolding you – you
would hear the sound of his speech, but it would be just sound because
you wouldn’t understand the meaning of the words. You wouldn’t be aware
that you were being told off. The mind wouldn’t receive that
information, it would merely hear the sound and remain at ease. If
anybody criticized you in a language that you didn’t understand, you
would just hear the sound of their voice and remain unperturbed. You
wouldn’t absorb the meaning of the words and be hurt over them. Once you
have practised with the mind to this point, it becomes easier to know
the arising and passing away of consciousness from moment to moment. As
you reflect like this, penetrating deeper and deeper inwards, the mind
becomes progressively more refined, going beyond the coarser
defilements.

Samādhi means the mind that is firmly concentrated, and the more you
practise the firmer the mind becomes. The more firmly the mind is
concentrated, the more resolute in the practice it becomes. The more you
contemplate, the more confident you become. The mind becomes truly
stable – to the point where it can’t be swayed by anything at all. You
are absolutely confident that no single mind-object has the power to
shake it. Mind-objects are mind-objects; the mind is the mind. The mind
experiences good and bad mental states, happiness and suffering, because
it is deluded by mind-objects. If it isn’t deluded by mind-objects,
there’s no suffering. The undeluded mind can’t be shaken. This
phenomenon is a state of awareness, where all things and phenomena are
viewed entirely as *dhātu* arising and passing away – just that much. It
might be possible to have this experience and yet still be unable to
fully let go. Whether you can or can’t let go, don’t let this bother
you. Before anything else, you must at least develop and sustain this
level of awareness or fixed determination in the mind. You have to keep
applying the pressure and destroying defilements through determined
effort, penetrating deeper and deeper into the practice.

Having discerned the Dhamma in this way, the mind will withdraw to a
less intense level of practice, which the Buddha and subsequent Buddhist
scriptures describe as the *Gotrabhū citta*. The *Gotrabhū citta* refers
to the mind which has experienced going beyond the boundaries of the
ordinary human mind. It is the mind of the *puthujjana* (ordinary
unenlightened individual) breaking through into the realm of the ariyan
(Noble One) – however, this phenomena still takes place within the mind
of the ordinary unenlightened individual like ourselves. The *Gotrabhū
puggala* is someone, who, having progressed in their practice until they
gain temporary experience of Nibbāna, withdraws from it and continues
practising on another level, because they have not yet completely cut
off all defilements. It’s like someone who is in the middle of stepping
across a stream, with one foot on the near bank, and the other on the
far side. They know for sure that there are two sides to the stream, but
are unable to cross over it completely and so step back. The
understanding that two sides to the stream exist is similar to that of
the *gotrabhū puggala* or the *Gotrabhū citta*. It means that you know
the way to go beyond the defilements, but are still unable to go there,
and so step back. Once you know for yourself that this state truly
exists, this knowledge remains with you constantly as you continue to
practise meditation and develop your *pāramī*. You are certain both of
the goal and the most direct way to reach it.

Simply speaking, this state that has arisen is the mind itself. If you
contemplate according to the truth of the way things are, you can see
that there exists just one path and it is your duty to follow it. It
means that you know from the very beginning that mental states of
happiness and suffering are not the path to follow. This is something
that you have to know for yourself – it is the truth of the way things
are. If you attach to happiness, you are off the path because attaching
to happiness will cause suffering to arise. If you attach to sadness, it
can be a cause for suffering to arise. You understand this – you are
already mindful with right view, but at the same time, are not yet able
to fully let go of your attachments.

So what is the correct way to practise? You must walk the middle path,
which means keeping track of the various mental states of happiness and
suffering, while at the same time keeping them at a distance, off to
either side of you. This is the correct way to practise; you maintain
mindfulness and awareness even though you are still unable to let go.
It’s the correct way, because whenever the mind attaches to states of
happiness and suffering, awareness of the attachment is always there.
This means that whenever the mind attaches to states of happiness, you
don’t praise it or give value to it, and whenever it attaches to states
of suffering, you don’t criticize it. This way you can actually observe
the mind as it is. Happiness is not right, suffering is not right. There
is the understanding that neither of these is the right path. You are
aware, awareness of them is sustained, but still you can’t fully abandon
them. You are unable to drop them, but you can be mindful of them. With
mindfulness established, you don’t give undue value to happiness or
suffering. You don’t give importance to either of those two directions
which the mind can take, and you hold no doubts about this; you know
that following either of those ways is not the right path of practise,
so at all times you take this middle way of equanimity as the object of
mind. When you practise to the point where the mind goes beyond
happiness and suffering, equanimity will necessarily arise as the path
to follow, and you have to gradually move down it, little by little. The
heart knows the way to go to be beyond defilements, but, not yet being
ready finally to transcend them, it withdraws and continues practising.

Whenever happiness arises and the mind attaches, you have to take that
happiness up for contemplation, and whenever it attaches to suffering,
you have to take that up for contemplation. Eventually, the mind reaches
a stage when it is fully mindful of both happiness and suffering. That’s
when it will be able to lay aside the happiness and the suffering, the
pleasure and the sadness, and lay aside all that is the world and so
become *lokavidū.* Once the mind – ‘the one who knows’ – can let go it
will settle down at that point. Why does it settle down? Because you
have done the practice and followed the path right down to that very
spot. You know what you have to do to reach the end of the path, but are
still unable to accomplish it. When the mind attaches to either
happiness or suffering, you are not deluded by them and strive to
dislodge the attachment and dig it out.

This is practising on the level of the *yogāvacara* – one who is
travelling along the path of practice – striving to cut through the
defilements, yet not having reached the goal. You focus upon these
conditions and the way it is from moment to moment in your own mind.
It’s not necessary to be personally interviewed about the state of your
mind or do anything special. When there is attachment to either
happiness or suffering, there must be the clear and certain
understanding that any attachment to either of these states is deluded.
It is attachment to the world. It is being stuck in the world. Happiness
means attachment to the world, suffering means attachment to the world.
This is the way worldly attachment is. What is it that creates or gives
rise to the world? The world is created and established through
ignorance. It’s because we are not mindful that the mind attaches
importance to things, fashioning and creating *sankhārā* (formations)
the whole time.

It is here that the practice becomes really interesting. Wherever there
is attachment in the mind, you keep hitting at that point, without
letting up. If there is attachment to happiness, you keep pounding at
it, not letting the mind get carried away with the mood. If the mind
attaches to suffering, you grab hold of that, really getting to grips
with it and contemplating it straight away. You are in the process of
finishing the job off; the mind doesn’t let a single mind-object slip by
without reflecting on it. Nothing can resist the power of your
mindfulness and wisdom. Even if the mind is caught in an unwholesome
mental state, you know it as unwholesome and the mind is not heedless.
It’s like stepping on thorns; of course, you don’t seek to step on
thorns, you try to avoid them, but nevertheless sometimes you step on
one. When you do step on one, do you feel good about it? You feel
aversion when you step on a thorn. Once you know the path of practice,
it means you know that which is the world, that which is suffering and
that which binds us to the endless cycle of birth and death. Even though
you know this, you are unable to stop stepping on those thorns. The mind
still follows various states of happiness and sadness, but doesn’t
completely indulge in them. You sustain a continuous effort to destroy
any attachment in the mind – to destroy and clear from the mind all that
which is the world.

You must practise right in the present moment. Meditate right there;
build your *pāramī* right there. This is the heart of practice, the
heart of your effort. You carry on an internal dialogue, discussing and
reflecting on the Dhamma within yourself. It’s something that takes
place right inside the mind. As worldly attachment is uprooted,
mindfulness and wisdom untiringly penetrate inwards, and the ‘one who
knows’ sustains awareness with equanimity, mindfulness and clarity,
without getting involved with or becoming enslaved to anybody or
anything. Not getting involved with things means knowing without
clinging – knowing while laying things aside and letting go. You still
experience happiness; you still experience suffering; you still
experience mind-objects and mental states, but you don’t cling to them.

Once you are seeing things as they are you know the mind as it is and
you know mind-objects as they are. You know the mind as separate from
mind-objects and mind-objects as separate from the mind. The mind is the
mind, mind-objects are mind-objects. Once you know these two phenomena
as they are, whenever they come together you will be mindful of them.
When the mind experiences mind-objects, mindfulness will be there. Our
teacher, the Buddha, described the practice of the *yogāvacara*, who is
able to sustain such awareness, whether walking, standing, sitting or
lying down, as being a continuous cycle. It is *sammā paṭipadā* (right
practice). You don’t forget yourself or become heedless.

You don’t simply observe the coarser parts of your practice, but also
watch the mind internally, on a more refined level. That which is on the
outside, you set aside. From here onwards you are just watching the body
and the mind, just observing this mind and its objects arising and
passing away, and understanding that having arisen they pass away. With
passing away there is further arising – birth and death, death and
birth; cessation followed by arising, arising followed by cessation.
Ultimately, you are simply watching the act of cessation. *Khayavayaṃ*
means degeneration and cessation. Degeneration and cessation are the
natural way of the mind and its objects – this is *khayavayaṃ*. Once the
mind is practising and experiencing this, it doesn’t have to follow up
on or search for anything else – it will be keeping abreast of things
with mindfulness. Seeing is just seeing. Knowing is just knowing. The
mind and mind-objects are just as they are. This is the way things are.
The mind isn’t proliferating about or creating anything in addition.

Don’t be confused or vague about the practice. Don’t get caught in
doubting. This applies to the practice of sīla just the same. As I
mentioned earlier, you have to look at it and contemplate whether it’s
right or wrong. Having contemplated it, then leave it there. Don’t have
doubts about it. Practising samādhi is the same. Keep practising,
calming the mind little by little. If you start thinking, it doesn’t
matter; if you’re not thinking, it doesn’t matter. The important thing
is to gain an understanding of the mind.

Some people want to make the mind peaceful, but don’t know what true
peace really is. They don’t know the peaceful mind. There are two kinds
of peacefulness – one is the peace that comes through samādhi, the other
is the peace that comes through paññā. The mind that is peaceful through
samādhi is still deluded. The peace that comes through the practice of
samādhi alone is dependent on the mind being separated from
mind-objects. When it’s not experiencing any mind-objects, then there is
calm, and consequently one attaches to the happiness that comes with
that calm.

However, whenever there is impingement through the senses, the mind
gives in straight away. It’s afraid of mind-objects. It’s afraid of
happiness and suffering; afraid of praise and criticism; afraid of
forms, sounds, smells and tastes. One who is peaceful through samādhi
alone is afraid of everything and doesn’t want to get involved with
anybody or anything on the outside. People practising samādhi in this
way just want to stay isolated in a cave somewhere, where they can
experience the bliss of samādhi without having to come out. Wherever
there is a peaceful place, they sneak off and hide themselves away. This
kind of samādhi involves a lot of suffering – they find it difficult to
come out of it and be with other people. They don’t want to see forms or
hear sounds. They don’t want to experience anything at all! They have to
live in some specially preserved quiet place, where no-one will come and
disturb them with conversation. They have to have really peaceful
surroundings.

This kind of peacefulness can’t do the job. If you have reached the
necessary level of calm, then withdraw from it. The Buddha didn’t teach
to practise samādhi with delusion. If you are practising like that, then
stop. If the mind has achieved calm, then use it as a basis for
contemplation. Contemplate the peace of concentration itself and use it
to connect the mind with and reflect upon the different mind-objects
which it experiences. Use the calm of samādhi to contemplate sights,
smells, tastes, tactile sensations and ideas. Use this calm to
contemplate the different parts of the body, such as the hair of the
head, hair of the body, nails, teeth, skin and so on. Contemplate the
three characteristics of *aniccaṃ* (impermanence), *dukkhaṃ* (suffering)
and *anattā* (not-self). Reflect upon this entire world. When you have
contemplated sufficiently, it is all right to re-establish the calm of
samādhi. You can re-enter it through sitting meditation and afterwards,
with calm re-established, continue with the contemplation. Use the state
of calm to train and purify the mind. Use it to challenge the mind. As
you gain knowledge, use it to fight the defilements, to train the mind.
If you simply enter samādhi and stay there you don’t gain any insight –
you are simply making the mind calm and that’s all. However, if you use
the calm mind to reflect, beginning with your external experience, this
calm will gradually penetrate deeper and deeper inwards, until the mind
experiences the most profound peace of all.

The peace which arises through paññā is distinctive, because when the
mind withdraws from the state of calm, the presence of paññā makes it
unafraid of forms, sounds, smells, tastes, tactile sensations and ideas.
It means that as soon as there is sense contact the mind is immediately
aware of the mind-object. As soon as there is sense contact you lay it
aside; as soon as there is sense contact mindfulness is sharp enough to
let go right away. This is the peace that comes through paññā.

When you are practising with the mind in this way, the mind becomes
considerably more refined than when you are developing samādhi alone.
The mind becomes very powerful, and no longer tries to run away. With
such energy you become fearless. In the past you were scared to
experience anything, but now you know mind-objects as they are and are
no longer afraid. You know your own strength of mind and are unafraid.
When you see a form, you contemplate it. When you hear a sound, you
contemplate it. You become proficient in the contemplation of
mind-objects. You are established in the practice with a new boldness,
which prevails whatever the conditions. Whether it be sights, sounds or
smells, you see them and let go of them as they occur. Whatever it is,
you can let go of it all. You clearly see happiness and let it go. You
clearly see suffering and let it go. Wherever you see them, you let them
go right there. That’s the way! Keep letting them go and casting them
aside right there. No mind-objects will be able to maintain a hold over
the mind. You leave them there and stay secure in your place of abiding
within the mind. As you experience, you cast aside. As you experience,
you observe. Having observed, you let go. All mind-objects lose their
value and are no longer able to sway you. This is the power of
vipassanā. When these characteristics arise within the mind of the
practitioner, it is appropriate to change the name of the practice to
vipassanā: clear knowing in accordance with the truth. That’s what it’s
all about – knowledge in accordance with the truth of the way things
are. This is peace at the highest level, the peace of vipassanā.
Developing peace through samādhi alone is very, very difficult; one is
constantly petrified.

So when the mind is at its most calm, what should you do? Train it.
Practise with it. Use it to contemplate. Don’t be scared of things.
Don’t attach. Developing samādhi so that you can just sit there and
attach to blissful mental states isn’t the true purpose of the practice.
You must withdraw from it. The Buddha said that you must fight this war,
not just hide out in a trench trying to avoid the enemy’s bullets. When
it’s time to fight, you really have to come out with guns blazing.
Eventually you have to come out of that trench. You can’t stay sleeping
there when it’s time to fight. This is the way the practice is. You
can’t allow your mind to just hide, cringing in the shadows.

Sīla and samādhi form the foundation of practice and it is essential to
develop them before anything else. You must train yourself and
investigate according to the monastic form and ways of practice which
have been passed down.

Be it as it may, I have described a rough outline of the practice. You
as the practitioners must avoid getting caught in doubts. Don’t doubt
about the way of practice. When there is happiness, watch the happiness.
When there is suffering, watch the suffering. Having established
awareness, make the effort to destroy both of them. Let them go. Cast
them aside. Know the object of mind and keep letting it go. Whether you
want to do sitting or walking meditation it doesn’t matter. If you keep
thinking, never mind. The important thing is to sustain moment to moment
awareness of the mind. If you are really caught in mental proliferation,
then gather it all together, and contemplate it in terms of being one
whole, cut it off right from the start, saying, ‘all these thoughts,
ideas and imaginings of mine are simply thought proliferation and
nothing more. It’s all *anicca*, *dukkha* and *anattā*. None of it is
certain at all.’ Discard it right there.

[^1]: Venerable: in Thai, *‘Pra’*.

[^2]: *Upapāramī*: refers to the same ten spiritual perfections, but
    practised on a deeper, more intense and profound level (practised to
    the highest degree, they are called *paramattha pāramī)*.
