What Is Contemplation?
======================

\<p class="chapter-footnote"\>*Note:* The following teaching is taken
from a session of questions and answers that took place at Wat Gor Nork
monastery during the Vassa of 1979, between Venerable Ajahn Chah and a
group of English-speaking disciples. Some rearrangement of the sequence
of conversation has been made for ease of understanding.\</p\>

When you teach about the value of contemplation, are you speaking of
sitting and thinking over particular themes – the for instance?

That is not necessary when the mind is truly still. When tranquillity is
properly established the right object of investigation becomes obvious.
When contemplation is ‘True’, there is no discrimination into ‘right’
and ‘wrong’, ‘good’ and ‘bad’; there is nothing even like that. You
don’t sit there thinking, ‘Oh, this is like that and that is like this’
etc. That is a coarse form of contemplation. Meditative contemplation is
not merely a matter of thinking – rather it’s what we call
‘contemplation in silence’. Whilst going about our daily routine we
mindfully consider the real nature of existence through comparisons.
This is a coarse kind of investigation but it leads to the real thing.

When you talk about contemplating the body and mind, though, do we
actually use thinking? Can thinking produce true insight? Is this

In the beginning we need to work using thinking, even though later on we
go beyond it. When we are doing true contemplation all dualistic
thinking has ceased; although we need to consider dualistically to get
started. Eventually all thinking and pondering comes to an end.

You say that there must be sufficient tranquillity () to contemplate.
Just how tranquil do you mean?

Tranquil enough for there to be presence of mind.

Do you mean staying with the here-and-now, not thinking about the past
and future?

Thinking about the past and future is all right if you understand what
these things really are, but you must not get caught up in them. Treat
them the same as you would anything else – don’t get caught up. When you
see thinking as just thinking, then that’s wisdom. Don’t believe in any
of it! Recognize that all of it is just something that has arisen and
will cease. Simply see everything just as it is – it is what it is – the
mind is the mind – it’s not anything or anybody in itself. Happiness is
just happiness, suffering is just suffering – it is just what it is.
When you see this you will be beyond doubt.

I still don’t understand. Is true contemplating the same as thinking?

We use thinking as a tool, but the knowing that arises because of its
use is above and beyond the process of thinking; it leads to our not
being fooled by our thinking anymore. You recognize that all thinking is
merely the movement of the mind, and also that knowing is not born and
doesn’t die. What do you think all this movement called ‘mind’ comes out
of? What we talk about as the mind – all the activity – is just the
conventional mind. It’s not the real mind at all. What is real just IS,
it’s not arising and it’s not passing away.

Trying to understand these things just by talking about them, though,
won’t work. We need to really consider impermanence, unsatisfactoriness
and impersonality (); that is, we need to use thinking to contemplate
the nature of conventional reality. What comes out of this work is
wisdom – and if it’s real wisdom everything’s completed, finished – we
recognize emptiness. Even though there may still be thinking, it’s empty
– you are not affected by it.

How can we arrive at this stage of the real mind?

You work with the mind you already have, of course! See that all that
arises is uncertain, that there is nothing stable or substantial. See it
clearly and see that there is really nowhere to take a hold of anything
– it’s all empty.

When you see the things that arise in the mind for what they are, you
won’t have to work with thinking anymore. You will have no doubt
whatsoever in these matters.

To talk about the ‘real mind’ and so on, may have a relative use in
helping us understand. We invent names for the sake of study, but
actually nature just is how it is. For example, sitting here downstairs
on the stone floor. The floor is the base – it’s not moving or going
anywhere. Upstairs, above us, is what has arisen out of this. Upstairs
is like everything that we see in our minds: form, feeling, memory,
thinking. Really, they don’t exist in the way we presume they do. They
are merely the conventional mind. As soon as they arise, they pass away
again; they don’t really exist in themselves.

There is a story in the scriptures about Venerable Sāriputta examining a
before allowing him to go off wandering (). He asked him how he would
reply if he was questioned, ‘What happens to the Buddha after he dies?’
The bhikkhu replied, ‘When form, feeling, perception, thinking and
consciousness arise, they pass away.’ Venerable Sāriputta passed him on
that.

Practice is not just a matter of talking about arising and passing away,
though. You must see it for yourself. When you are sitting, simply see
what is actually happening. Don’t follow anything. Contemplation doesn’t
mean being caught up in thinking. The contemplative thinking of one on
the Way is not the same as the thinking of the world. Unless you
understand properly what is meant by contemplation, the more you think
the more confused you will become.

The reason we make such a point of the cultivation of mindfulness is
because we need to see clearly what is going on. We must understand the
processes of our hearts. When such mindfulness and understanding are
present, then everything is taken care of. Why do you think one who
knows the Way never acts out of anger or delusion? The causes for these
things to arise are simply not there. Where would they come from?
Mindfulness has got everything covered.

Is this mind you are talking about called the ‘Original Mind’?

What do you mean?

It seems as if you are saying there is something else outside of the
conventional body-mind (the five ). Is there something else? What do you
call it?

There isn’t anything and we don’t call it anything – that’s all there is
to it! Be finished with all of it. Even the knowing doesn’t belong to
anybody, so be finished with that, too! Consciousness is not an
individual, not a being, not a self, not an other, so finish with that –
finish with everything! There is nothing worth wanting! It’s all just a
load of trouble. When you see clearly like this then everything is
finished.

Could we not call it the ‘Original Mind’?

You can call it that if you insist. You can call it whatever you like,
for the sake of conventional reality. But you must understand this point
properly. This is very important. If we didn’t make use of conventional
reality we wouldn’t have any words or concepts with which to consider
actual reality – Dhamma. This is very important to understand.

What degree of tranquillity are you talking about at this stage? And
what quality of mindfulness is needed?

You don’t need to go thinking like that. If you didn’t have the right
amount of tranquillity you wouldn’t be able to deal with these questions
at all. You need enough stability and concentration to know what is
going on – enough for clarity and understanding to arise.

Asking questions like this shows that you are still doubting. You need
enough tranquillity of mind to no longer get caught in doubting what you
are doing. If you had done the practice you would understand these
things. The more you carry on with this sort of questioning, the more
confusing you make it. It’s all right to talk if the talking helps
contemplation, but it won’t show you the way things actually are. This
Dhamma is not understood because somebody else tells you about it, you
must see it for yourself –

If you have the quality of understanding that we have been talking
about, then we say that your duty to do anything is over; which means
that you don’t do anything. If there is still something to do, then it’s
your duty to do it.

Simply keep putting everything down, and know that that is what you are
doing. You don’t always need to be checking up on yourself, worrying
about things like ‘How much samādhi’ … it will always be the right
amount. Whatever arises in your practice, let it go; know it all as
uncertain, impermanent. Remember that! It’s all uncertain. Be finished
with all of it. This is the Way that will take you to the source – to
your Original Mind.
