The Path in Harmony
===================

\<span class="dropcaps-first"\>T\</span\>\<span
class="dropcaps-words"\>oday I would like\</span\> to ask you all: ‘are
you sure yet, are you certain in your meditation practice?’ I ask
because these days there are many people teaching meditation, both monks
and laypeople, and I’m afraid you may be subject to wavering and doubt.
If we understand clearly, we will be able to make the mind peaceful and
firm.

You should understand the as morality, concentration and wisdom. The
path comes together as simply this. Our practice is to make this path
arise within us.

When sitting in meditation we are told to close our eyes, not to look at
anything else, because now we are going to look directly at the mind.
When we close our eyes, our attention comes inwards. We establish our
attention on the breath, centre our feelings there, put our mindfulness
there. When the factors of the path are in harmony we will be able to
see the breath, the feelings, the mind and mental objects for what they
are. Here we will see the ‘focus point’, where and the other factors of
the path converge in harmony.

When we are sitting in meditation, following the breath, think to
yourself that now you are sitting alone. There is no one sitting around
you, there is nothing at all. Develop this feeling that you are sitting
alone until the mind lets go of all externals, concentrating solely on
the breath. If you are thinking, ‘This person is sitting over here, that
person is sitting over there,’ there is no peace, the mind doesn’t come
inwards. Just cast all that aside until you feel there is no one sitting
around you, until there is nothing at all, until you have no wavering or
interest in your surroundings.

Let the breath go naturally, don’t force it to be short or long or
whatever, just sit and watch it going in and out. When the mind lets go
of all external impressions, the sounds of cars and such will not
disturb you. Nothing, whether sights or sounds, will disturb you,
because the mind doesn’t receive them. Your attention will come together
on the breath.

If the mind is confused and won’t concentrate on the breath, take a
full, deep breath, as deep as you can, and then let it all out till
there is none left. Do this three times and then re-establish your
attention. The mind will become calm.

It’s natural for it to be calm for a while, and then restlessness and
confusion may arise again. When this happens, concentrate, breathe
deeply again, and then re-establish your attention on the breath. Just
keep going like this. When this has happened many times you will become
adept at it. The mind will let go of all external manifestations.
External impressions will not reach the mind. will be firmly
established.

As the mind becomes more refined, so does the breath. Feelings will
become finer and finer, the body and mind will be light. Our attention
is solely on the inner, we see the in-breaths and out-breaths clearly,
we see all impressions clearly. Here we will see the coming together of
morality, concentration and wisdom. This is called the path in harmony.
When there is this harmony our mind will be free of confusion, it will
come together as one. This is called samādhi.

After watching the breath for a long time, it may become very refined;
the awareness of the breath will gradually cease, leaving only bare
awareness. The breath may become so refined it disappears! Perhaps we
are ‘just sitting’, as if there is no breathing at all. Actually there
is breathing, but it seems as if there’s none. This is because the mind
has reached its most refined state, there is just bare awareness. It has
gone beyond the breath. The knowledge that the breath has disappeared
becomes established. What will we take as our object of meditation now?
We take just this knowledge as our object, that is, the awareness that
there’s no breath.

Unexpected things may happen at this time; some people experience them,
some don’t. If they do arise, we should be firm and have strong
mindfulness. Some people see that the breath has disappeared and get a
fright, they’re afraid they might die. Here we should know the situation
just as it is. We simply notice that there’s no breath and take that as
our object of awareness.

This, we can say, is the firmest, surest type of samādhi: there is only
one firm, unmoving state of mind. Perhaps the body will become so light
it’s as if there is no body at all. We feel like we’re sitting in empty
space, completely empty. Although this may seem very unusual, you should
understand that there’s nothing to worry about. Firmly establish your
mind like this.

When the mind is firmly unified, having no sense impressions to disturb
it, one can remain in that state for any length of time. There will be
no painful feelings to disturb us. When samādhi has reached this level,
we can leave it when we choose, but if we come out of this samādhi, we
do so comfortably, not because we’ve become bored with it or tired. We
come out because we’ve had enough for now, we feel at ease; we have no
problems at all.

If we can develop this type of samādhi, then if we sit, say, thirty
minutes or an hour, the mind will be cool and calm for many days. When
the mind is cool and calm like this, it is clean. Whatever we
experience, the mind will take up and investigate. This is a fruit of
samādhi.

Morality has one function, concentration has another function and wisdom
another. These factors are like a cycle. We can see them all within the
peaceful mind. When the mind is calm it has collectedness and restraint
because of wisdom and the energy of concentration. As it becomes more
collected it becomes more refined, which in turn gives morality the
strength to increase in purity. As our morality becomes purer, this will
help in the development of concentration. When concentration is firmly
established it helps in the arising of wisdom. Morality, concentration
and wisdom help each other, they are interrelated like this.

In the end the path becomes one and functions at all times. We should
look after the strength which arises from the path, because it is the
strength which leads to insight and wisdom.

On the Dangers Of Samādhi
-------------------------

Samādhi is capable of bringing much harm or much benefit to the
meditator. You can’t say it brings only one or the other. For one who
has no wisdom it is harmful, but for one who has wisdom it can bring
real benefit, it can lead to insight.

That which can possibly be harmful to the meditator is absorption
samādhi (), the samādhi with deep, sustained calm. This samādhi brings
great peace. Where there is peace, there is happiness. When there is
happiness, attachment and clinging to that happiness arise. The
meditator doesn’t want to contemplate anything else, he just wants to
indulge in that pleasant feeling. When we have been practising for a
long time we may become adept at entering this samādhi very quickly. As
soon as we start to note our meditation object, the mind enters calm,
and we don’t want to come out to investigate anything. We just get stuck
on that happiness. This is a danger to one who is practising meditation.

We must use Here, we enter calm and then, when the mind is sufficiently
calm, we come out and look at outer activity.[^1] Looking at the outside
with a calm mind gives rise to wisdom. This is hard to understand,
because it’s almost like ordinary thinking and imagining. When thinking
is there, we may think the mind isn’t peaceful, but actually that
thinking is taking place within the calm. There is contemplation but it
doesn’t disturb the calm. We may bring thinking up in order to
contemplate it. Here we take up thinking to investigate it, it’s not
that we are aimlessly thinking or guessing away; it’s something that
arises from a peaceful mind. This is called ‘awareness within calm and
calm within awareness’. If it’s simply ordinary thinking and imagining,
the mind won’t be peaceful, it will be disturbed. But I am not talking
about ordinary thinking; this is a feeling that arises from the peaceful
mind. It’s called ‘contemplation’. Wisdom is born right here.

So, there can be right samādhi and wrong samādhi. Wrong samādhi is where
the mind enters calm and there’s no awareness at all. One could sit for
two hours or even all day but the mind doesn’t know where it’s been or
what’s happened. It doesn’t know anything. There is calm, but that’s
all. It’s like a well-sharpened knife which we don’t bother to put to
any use. This is a deluded type of calm, because there is not much
self-awareness. The meditator may think he has reached the ultimate
already, so he doesn’t bother to look for anything else. Samādhi can be
an enemy at this level. Wisdom can not arise because there is no
awareness of right and wrong.

With right samādhi, no matter what level of calm is reached, there is
awareness. There is full mindfulness and clear comprehension. This is
the samādhi which can give rise to wisdom, one can not get lost in it.
Practitioners should understand this well. You can’t do without this
awareness, it must be present from beginning to end. This kind of
samādhi has no danger.

You may wonder: where does the benefit arise, how does the wisdom arise,
from samādhi? When right samādhi has been developed, wisdom has the
chance to arise at all times. When the eye sees form, the ear hears
sound, the nose smells odours, the tongue experiences taste, the body
experiences touch or the mind experiences mental impressions – in all
postures – the mind stays with full knowledge of the true nature of
those sense impressions, it doesn’t follow them.

When the mind has wisdom it doesn’t ‘pick and choose’. In any posture we
are fully aware of the birth of happiness and unhappiness. We let go of
both of these things, we don’t cling. This is called right practice,
which is present in all postures. These words ‘all postures’ do not
refer only to bodily postures, they refer to the mind, which has
mindfulness and clear comprehension of the truth at all times. When
samādhi has been rightly developed, wisdom arises like this. This is
called ‘insight’, knowledge of the truth.

There are two kinds of peace – the coarse and the refined. The peace
which comes from samādhi is the coarse type. When the mind is peaceful
there is happiness. The mind then takes this happiness to be peace. But
happiness and unhappiness are becoming and birth. There is no escape
from here because we still cling to them. So happiness is not peace,
peace is not happiness.

The other type of peace is that which comes from wisdom. Here we don’t
confuse peace with happiness; we know the mind which contemplates and
knows happiness and unhappiness as peace. The peace which arises from
wisdom is not happiness, but is that which sees the truth of both
happiness and unhappiness. Clinging to those states does not arise, the
mind rises above them. This is the true goal of all Buddhist practice.

[^1]: ‘Outer activity’ refers to all manner of sense impressions. It is
    used in contrast to the ‘inner inactivity’ of absorption samādhi (),
    where the mind does not ‘go out’ to external sense impressions.
