Tranquillity and Insight
========================

\<p class="chapter-footnote"\>*Note*: This talk has been published
elsewhere under the title: ‘*On Meditation*’\</p\>

\<span class="dropcaps-first"\>T\</span\>\<span
class="dropcaps-words"\>o calm the mind\</span\> means to find the right
balance. If you try to force your mind too much it goes too far; if you
don’t try enough it doesn’t get there, it misses the point of balance.

Normally the mind isn’t still, it’s moving all the time. We must make an
effort to strengthen the mind. Making the mind strong and making the
body strong are not the same. To make the body strong we have to
exercise it, to push it, but to make the mind strong means to make it
peaceful, not to go thinking of this and that. For most of us the mind
has never been peaceful, it has never had the energy of so we must
establish it within a boundary. We sit in meditation, staying with the

If we force our breath to be too long or too short, we’re not balanced,
the mind won’t become peaceful. It’s like when we first start to use a
pedal sewing machine. At first we just practise pedalling the machine to
get our coordination right, before we actually sew anything. Following
the breath is similar. We don’t get concerned over how long or short,
weak or strong it is, we just note it. We simply let it be, following
the natural breathing.

When our breathing is balanced, we take it as our meditation object.
When we breathe in, the beginning of the breath is at the nose tip, the
middle of the breath at the chest and the end of the breath at the
abdomen. This is the path of the breath. When we breathe out, the
beginning of the breath is at the abdomen, the middle at the chest and
the end at the nose-tip. Simply take note of this path of the breath at
the nose tip, the chest and the abdomen, then at the abdomen, the chest
and the tip of the nose. We take note of these three points in order to
make the mind firm, to limit mental activity so that mindfulness and
self-awareness can easily arise.

When our attention settles on these three points, we can let them go and
note the in and out breathing, concentrating solely at the nose tip or
the upper lip, where the air passes on its in and out passage. We don’t
have to follow the breath, we just establish mindfulness in front of us
at the nose tip, and note the breath at this one point – entering,
leaving, entering, leaving.

There’s no need to think of anything special, just concentrate on this
simple task for now, having continuous presence of mind. There’s nothing
more to do, just breath in and out. Soon the mind becomes peaceful, the
breath refined. The mind and body become light. This is the right state
for the work of meditation.

When sitting in meditation the mind becomes refined, but we should try
to be aware, to know whatever state it’s in. Mental activity is there
together with tranquillity. There is is the action of bringing the mind
to the theme of contemplation. If there is not much mindfulness, there
will not be much . Then the contemplation around that theme, follows.
Various weak mental impressions may arise from time to time but our
self-awareness is the important thing – whatever may be happening we
know it continuously. As we go deeper we are constantly aware of the
state of our meditation, knowing whether or not the mind is firmly
established. Thus, both concentration and awareness are present.

Having a peaceful mind does not mean that there’s nothing happening,
mental impressions do arise. For instance, when we talk about the first
level of absorption, we say it has five factors. Along with and , arises
with the theme of contemplation and then These four things all lie
together in the mind that is established in tranquillity. They are as
one state.

The fifth factor is or one-pointedness. You may wonder how there can be
one-pointedness when there are all these other factors as well. This is
because they all become unified on that foundation of tranquillity.
Together they are called a state of samādhi. They are not everyday
states of mind, they are factors of absorption. There are these five
characteristics, but they do not disturb the basic tranquillity. There
is , but it does not disturb the mind; , rapture and happiness arise but
do not disturb the mind. The mind is therefore as one with these
factors. The first level of absorption is like this.

We don’t have to call it first second , third and so on, let’s just call
it ‘a peaceful mind’. As the mind becomes progressively calmer it will
dispense with and , leaving only rapture and happiness. Why does the
mind discard and ? This is because, as the mind becomes more refined,
the activities of and are too coarse to remain. At this stage, as the
mind leaves off and , feelings of great rapture can arise, tears may
gush out. But as the samādhi deepens, rapture too is discarded, leaving
only happiness and one-pointedness, until finally even happiness goes
and the mind reaches its greatest refinement. There is only equanimity
and one-pointedness, all else has been left behind. The mind stands
unmoving.

Once the mind is peaceful this can happen. You don’t have to think a lot
about it; it just happens by itself when the causal factors are ripe.
This is called the energy of a peaceful mind. In this state the mind is
not drowsy; the five hindrances (sense desire, aversion, restlessness,
dullness and doubt) have all fled.

But if mental energy is still not strong and mindfulness is weak, there
will occasionally arise intruding mental impressions. The mind is
peaceful but it’s as if there’s a ‘cloudiness’ within the calm. It’s not
a normal sort of drowsiness though, some impressions will manifest –
maybe we’ll hear a sound or see a dog or something. It’s not really
clear but it’s not a dream either. This is because these five factors
have become unbalanced and weak.

The mind tends to play tricks within these levels of tranquillity.
‘Imagery’ will sometimes arise when the mind is in this state, through
any of the senses, and the meditator may not be able to tell exactly
what is happening. ‘Am I sleeping? No. Is it a dream? No, it’s not a
dream.’ These impressions arise from a middling sort of tranquillity;
but if the mind is truly calm and clear we don’t doubt the various
mental impressions or imagery which arise. Questions like, ‘Did I drift
off then? Was I sleeping? Did I get lost?’ don’t arise, for they are
characteristics of a mind which is still doubting. ‘Am I asleep or
awake?’ Here, the mind is fuzzy. This is the mind getting lost in its
moods. It’s like the moon going behind a cloud. You can still see the
moon but the clouds covering it render it hazy. It’s not like the moon
which has emerged from behind the clouds clear, sharp and bright.

When the mind is peaceful and established firmly in mindfulness and
self-awareness, there will be no doubt concerning the various phenomena
which we encounter. The mind will truly be beyond the hindrances. We
will clearly know everything which arises in the mind as it is. We do
not doubt because the mind is clear and bright. The mind which reaches
samādhi is like this.

Some people find it hard to enter samādhi because they don’t have the
right tendencies. There is samādhi, but it’s not strong or firm.
However, one can attain peace through the use of wisdom, through
contemplating and seeing the truth of things, solving problems that way.
This is using wisdom rather than the power of samādhi. To attain calm in
practice, it’s not necessary to be sitting in meditation. For instance,
just ask yourself, ‘Eh, what is that?’ and solve your problem right
there! A person with wisdom is like this. Perhaps he can’t really attain
high levels of samādhi, although there must be some concentration, just
enough to cultivate wisdom. It’s like the difference between farming
rice and farming corn. One can depend on rice more than corn for one’s
livelihood. Our practice can be like this, we depend more on wisdom to
solve problems. When we see the truth, peace arises.

The two ways are not the same. Some people have insight and are strong
in wisdom but do not have much samādhi. When they sit in meditation they
aren’t very peaceful. They tend to think a lot, contemplating this and
that, until eventually they contemplate happiness and suffering and see
the truth of them. Some incline more towards this than samādhi. Whether
standing, walking, sitting or lying, enlightenment of the Dhamma can
take place. Through seeing, through relinquishing, they attain peace.
They attain peace through knowing the truth, through going beyond doubt,
because they have seen it for themselves.

Other people have only little wisdom but their samādhi is very strong.
They can enter very deep samādhi quickly, but not having much wisdom,
they can not catch their defilements; they don’t know them. They can’t
solve their problems. But regardless of whichever approach we use, we
must do away with wrong thinking, leaving only We must get rid of
confusion, leaving only peace. Either way we end up at the same place.
There are these two sides to practice, but these two things, calm and
insight, go together. We can’t do away with either of them. They must go
together.

That which ‘looks over’ the various factors which arise in meditation is
mindfulness. This sati is a condition which, through practise, can help
other factors to arise. Sati is life. Whenever we don’t have sati, when
we are heedless, it’s as if we are dead. If we have no sati, then our
speech and actions have no meaning. Sati is simply recollection. It’s a
cause for the arising of self-awareness and wisdom. Whatever virtues we
have cultivated are imperfect if lacking in sati. Sati is that which
watches over us while standing, walking, sitting and lying. Even when we
are no longer in samādhi, sati should be present throughout.

Whatever we do, we take care. A sense of shame[^1] will arise. We will
feel ashamed about the things we do which aren’t correct. As shame
increases, our collectedness will increase as well. When collectedness
increases, heedlessness will disappear. Even if we don’t sit in
meditation, these factors will be present in the mind.

And this arises because of cultivating sati. Develop sati! This is the
quality which looks over the work we are doing in the present. It has
real value. We should know ourselves at all times. If we know ourselves
like this, right will distinguish itself from wrong, the path will
become clear, and the cause for all shame will dissolve. Wisdom will
arise.

We can bring the practice all together as morality, concentration and
wisdom. To be collected, to be controlled, this is morality. The firm
establishing of the mind within that control is concentration. Complete,
overall knowledge within the activity in which we are engaged is wisdom.
The practice in brief is just morality, concentration and wisdom, or in
other words, the path. There is no other way.

[^1]: This is a wholesome sense of shame based on knowledge of cause and
    effect, rather than emotional guilt.
