The Place of Coolness
=====================

<p class="chapter-footnote" markdown="1">*Note*: This talk has been
published elsewhere under the title: ‘*Right View – the Place of
Coolness*’</p>

<span class="dropcaps-first" markdown="1">T</span><span
class="dropcaps-words" markdown="1">he practice of Dhamma goes
against</span>&nbsp; our habits, the truth goes against our desires;
so there is difficulty in the practice. Some things which we understand
as wrong may be right, while the things we take to be right may be
wrong. Why is this? Because our minds are in darkness, we don’t clearly
see the Truth. We don’t really know anything and so are fooled by
people’s lies. They point out what is right as being wrong and we
believe it; that which is wrong, they say is right, and we believe that.
This is because we are not yet our own masters. Our moods lie to us
constantly. We shouldn’t take this mind and its opinions as our guide,
because it doesn’t know the truth.

Some people don’t want to listen to others at all, but this is not the
way of a man of wisdom. A wise man listens to everything. One who
listens to Dhamma must listen just the same, whether he likes it or not,
and not blindly believe or disbelieve. He must stay at the half-way
mark, the middle point, and not be heedless. He just listens and then
contemplates, giving rise to the right results accordingly.

A wise man should contemplate and see the cause and effect for himself
before he believes what he hears. Even if the teacher speaks the truth,
don’t just believe it, because you don’t yet know the truth of it for
yourself.

It’s the same for all of us, including myself. I’ve practised longer
than you, I’ve seen many lies before. For instance, ‘this practice is
really difficult, really hard.’ Why is the practice difficult? It’s just
because we think wrongly, we have wrong view.

Previously I lived together with other monks, but I didn’t feel right. I
ran away to the forests and mountains, fleeing the crowd, the monks and
novices. I thought that they weren’t like me, they didn’t practise as
hard as I did. They were sloppy. That person was like this, this person
was like that. This was something that really put me in turmoil, it was
the cause for my continually running away. But whether I lived alone or
with others, I still had no peace. On my own I wasn’t content, in a
large group I wasn’t content. I thought this discontent was due to my
companions, due to my moods, due to my living place, the food, the
weather, due to this and that. I was constantly searching for something
to suit my mind.

As a *dhutaṅga* monk, I went travelling, but things still weren’t right.
So I contemplated, ‘what can I do to make things right? What can I do?’
Living with a lot of people I was dissatisfied, with few people I was
dissatisfied. For what reason? I just couldn’t see it. Why was I
dissatisfied? Because I had wrong view, just that; because I still clung
to the wrong Dhamma. Wherever I went I was discontent, thinking, ‘Here
is no good, there is no good,’ on and on like that. I blamed others. I
blamed the weather, heat and cold, I blamed everything! Just like a mad
dog. It bites whatever it meets, because it’s mad. When the mind is like
this our practice is never settled. Today we feel good, tomorrow no
good. It’s like that all the time. We don’t attain contentment or peace.

The Buddha once saw a jackal, a wild dog, run out of the forest where he
was staying. It stood still for a while, then it ran into the
underbrush, and then out again. Then it ran into a tree hollow, then out
again. Then it went into a cave, only to run out again. One minute it
stood, the next it ran, then it lay down, then it jumped up. That jackal
had mange. When it stood the mange would eat into its skin, so it would
run. Running it was still uncomfortable, so it would stop. Standing was
still uncomfortable, so it would lie down. Then it would jump up again,
running into the underbrush, the tree hollow, never staying still.

The Buddha said, ‘Monks, did you see that jackal this afternoon?
Standing it suffered, running it suffered, sitting it suffered, lying
down it suffered. In the underbrush, a tree hollow or a cave, it
suffered. It blamed standing for its discomfort, it blamed sitting, it
blamed running and lying down; it blamed the tree, the underbrush and
the cave. In fact the problem was with none of those things. That jackal
had mange. The problem was with the mange.’

We monks are just the same as that jackal. Our discontent is due to
wrong view. Because we don’t exercise sense restraint we blame our
suffering on externals. Whether we live at Wat Pah Pong, in America or
in London we aren’t satisfied. Going to live at Bung Wai or any of the
other branch monasteries we’re still not satisfied. Why not? Because we
still have wrong view within us. Wherever we go we aren’t content.

But just like that dog, if the mange is cured, it is content wherever it
goes, so it is for us. I reflect on this often, and I teach you this
often, because it’s very important. If we know the truth of our various
moods we arrive at contentment. Whether it’s hot or cold we are
satisfied, living with many people or with few people we are satisfied.
Contentment doesn’t depend on how many people we are with, it comes only
from right view. If we have right view then wherever we stay we are
content.

But most of us have wrong view. It’s just like a maggot – a maggot’s
living place is filthy, its food is filthy, but they suit the maggot. If
you take a stick and brush it away from its lump of dung, it’ll struggle
to crawl back in. It’s the same when the Ajahn teaches us to see
rightly. We resist, it makes us feel uneasy. We run back to our ‘lump of
dung’ because that’s where we feel at home. We’re all like this. If we
don’t see the harmful consequences of all our wrong views then we can’t
leave them; the practice is difficult. So we should listen. There’s
nothing else to the practice.

If we have right view, wherever we go we are content. I have practised
and seen this already. These days there are many monks, novices and
laypeople coming to see me. If I still didn’t know, if I still had wrong
view, I’d be dead by now! The right abiding place for monks, the place
of coolness, is just right view itself. We shouldn’t look for anything
else.

So even though you may be unhappy it doesn’t matter, that unhappiness is
uncertain. Is that unhappiness your ‘self’? Is there any substance to
it? Is it real? I don’t see it as being real at all. Unhappiness is
merely a flash of feeling which appears and then is gone. Happiness is
the same. Is there a consistency to happiness? Is it truly an entity?
It’s simply a feeling that flashes suddenly and is gone. There! It’s
born and then it dies. Love just flashes up for a moment and then
disappears. Where is the consistency in love, or hate, or resentment? In
truth there is no substantial entity there, they are merely impressions
which flare up in the mind and then die. They deceive us constantly, we
find no certainty anywhere. Just as the Buddha said, when unhappiness
arises it stays for a while, then disappears. When unhappiness
disappears, happiness arises and lingers for a while and then dies. When
happiness disappears, unhappiness arises again, on and on like this.

In the end we can say only this: apart from the birth, the life and the
death of suffering, there is nothing. There is just this. But we who are
ignorant run and grab it constantly. We never see the truth of it, that
there’s simply this continual change. If we understand this then we
don’t need to think very much, but we have much wisdom. If we don’t know
it, then we will have more thinking than wisdom – and maybe no wisdom at
all! It’s not until we truly see the harmful results of our actions that
we can give them up. Likewise, it’s not until we see the real benefits
of practice that we can follow it, and begin working to make the mind
‘good’.

If we cut a log of wood and throw it into the river, and that log
doesn’t sink or rot, or run aground on either of the banks of the river,
that log will definitely reach the sea. Our practice is comparable to
this. If you practise according to the path laid down by the Buddha,
following it straight, you will transcend two things. What two things?
Just those two extremes that the Buddha said were not the path of a true
meditator: indulgence in pleasure and indulgence in pain. These are the
two banks of the river. One of the banks of that river is hate, the
other is love. Or you can say that one bank is happiness, the other
unhappiness. The ‘log’ is this mind. As it ‘flows down the river’ it
will experience happiness and unhappiness. If the mind doesn’t cling to
that happiness or unhappiness it will reach the ‘ocean’ of Nibbāna. You
should see that there is nothing other than happiness and unhappiness
arising and disappearing. If you don’t ‘run aground’ on these things
then you are on the path of a true meditator.

This is the teaching of the Buddha. Happiness, unhappiness, love and
hate are simply established in nature according to the constant law of
nature. The wise person doesn’t follow or encourage them, he doesn’t
cling to them. This is the mind which lets go of indulgence in pleasure
and indulgence in pain. It is the right practice. Just as that log of
wood will eventually flow to the sea, so will the mind which doesn’t
attach to these two extremes inevitably attain peace.
