No Abiding
==========

\<span class="dropcaps-first"\>W\</span\>\<span
class="dropcaps-words"\>e hear some\</span\> of the teachings and can’t
really understand them. We think they shouldn’t be the way they are, so
we don’t follow them, but really there is a reason to all the teachings.
Maybe it seems that things shouldn’t be that way, but they are. At first
I didn’t even believe in sitting meditation. I couldn’t see what use it
would be to just sit with your eyes closed. And walking meditation,
walking from this tree to that tree, turning around and walking back
again. ‘Why bother?’ I thought, ‘What’s the use of all that walking?’ I
thought like that, but actually walking and sitting meditation are of
great use.

Some people’s tendencies cause them to prefer walking meditation, others
prefer sitting, but you can’t do without either of them. The scriptures
refer to the four postures: standing, walking, sitting and lying down.
We live with these four postures. We may prefer one to the other, but we
must use all four.

The scriptures say to make these four postures even, to make the
practice even in all postures. At first I couldn’t figure out what it
meant to make them even. Maybe it means we sleep for two hours, then
stand for two hours, then walk for two hours … maybe that’s it? I tried
it – couldn’t do it, it was impossible! That’s not what it meant to make
the postures even. ‘Making the postures even’ refers to the mind, to our
awareness, giving rise to wisdom in the mind, to illumine the mind. This
wisdom of ours must be present in all postures; we must know, or
understand, constantly. Standing, walking, sitting or lying down, we
know all mental states as impermanent, unsatisfactory and not-self.
Making the postures even in this way can be done, it is possible.
Whether like or dislike are present in the mind, we don’t forget our
practice, we are aware.

If we just focus our attention on the mind constantly then we have the
gist of the practice. Whether we experience mental states which the
world knows as good or bad we don’t forget ourselves. We don’t get lost
in good or bad, we just go straight. Making the postures constant in
this way is possible.

If we have constancy in our practice, when we are praised, then it’s
simply praise; if we are blamed, it’s just blame. We don’t get high or
low over it, we stay right here. Why? Because we see the danger in all
those things, we see their results. We are constantly aware of the
danger in both praise and blame. Normally, if we have a good mood the
mind is good also, we see them as the same thing; if we have a bad mood
the mind goes bad as well, we don’t like it. This is the way it is, this
is uneven practice.

If we have constancy just to the extent of knowing our moods, and
knowing we’re clinging to them, this is better already. That is, we have
awareness, we know what’s going on, but we still can’t let go. We see
ourselves clinging to good and bad, and we know it. We cling to good and
know it’s not right practice, but we still can’t let go. This is fifty
to seventy per cent of the practice already. There still isn’t release
but we know that if we could let go, that would be the way to peace. We
keep seeing the equally harmful consequences of all our likes and
dislikes, of praise and blame, continuously. Whatever the conditions may
be, the mind is constant in this way.

But if worldly people get blamed or criticized, they get really upset.
If they get praised it cheers them up, they say it’s good and get really
happy over it. If we know the truth of our various moods, if we know the
consequences of clinging to praise and blame, the danger of clinging to
anything at all, we will become sensitive to our moods. We will know
that clinging to them really causes suffering. We see this suffering,
and we see our very clinging as the cause of that suffering. We begin to
see the consequences of grabbing and clinging to good and bad, because
we’ve grasped them and seen the result before – no real happiness. So
now we look for the way to let go.

Where is this ‘way to let go’? In Buddhism we say ‘Don’t cling to
anything.’ We never stop hearing about this ‘don’t cling to anything!’
This means to hold, but not to cling. Like this flashlight. We think,
‘What is this?’ So we pick it up, ‘Oh, it’s a flashlight,’ then we put
it down again. We hold things in this way.

If we didn’t hold anything at all, what could we do ? We couldn’t do
walking meditation or do anything, so we must hold things first. It’s
wanting, yes, that’s true, but later on it leads to (virtue or
perfection). Like wanting to come here, for instance. Venerable
Jagaro[^1] came to Wat Pah Pong. He had to want to come first. If he
hadn’t felt that he wanted to come he wouldn’t have come. For anybody
it’s the same, they come here because of wanting. But when wanting
arises don’t cling to it! So you come, and then you go back. What is
this? We pick it up, look at it and see, ‘Oh, it’s a flashlight,’ then
we put it down. This is called holding but not clinging, we let go. We
know and then we let go. To put it simply we say just this, ‘Know, then
let go.’ Keep looking and letting go. ‘This, they say is good; this they
say is not good’ … know, and then let go. Good and bad, we know it all,
but we let it go. We don’t foolishly cling to things, but we ‘hold’ them
with wisdom. Practising in this ‘posture’ can be constant. You must be
constant like this. Make the mind know in this way; let wisdom arise.
When the mind has wisdom, what else is there to look for?

We should reflect on what we are doing here. For what reason are we
living here, what are we working for? In the world they work for this or
that reward, but the monks teach something a little deeper than that.
Whatever we do, we ask for no return. We work for no reward. Worldly
people work because they want this or that, because they want some gain
or other, but the Buddha taught to work just in order to work; we don’t
ask for anything beyond that.

If you do something just to get some return it’ll cause suffering. Try
it out for yourself! You want to make your mind peaceful so you sit down
and try to make it peaceful – you’ll suffer! Try it. Our way is more
refined. We do, and then let go; do, and then let go.

Look at the Brahmin who makes a sacrifice. He has some desire in mind,
so he makes a sacrifice. Those actions of his won’t help him transcend
suffering because he’s acting on desire. In the beginning we practise
with some desire in mind; we practise on and on, but we don’t attain our
desire. So we practise until we reach a point where we’re practising for
no return, we’re practising in order to let go.

This is something we must see for ourselves, it’s very deep. Maybe we
practise because we want to go to – right there, you won’t get to
Nibbāna! It’s natural to want peace, but it’s not really correct. We
must practise without wanting anything at all. If we don’t want anything
at all, what will we get? We don’t get anything! Whatever you get is a
cause for suffering, so we practise not getting anything.

Just this is called ‘making the mind empty’. It’s empty but there is
still doing. This emptiness is something people don’t usually
understand; only those who reach it see the real value of it. It’s not
the emptiness of not having anything, it’s emptiness within the things
that are here. Like this flashlight: we should see this flashlight as
empty; because of the flashlight there is emptiness. It’s not the
emptiness where we can’t see anything, it’s not like that. People who
understand like that have got it all wrong. You must understand
emptiness within the things that are here.

Those who are still practising because they have some gaining idea are
like the Brahmin making a sacrifice just to fulfil some wish. Like the
people who come to see me to be sprinkled with ‘holy water’. When I ask
them, ‘Why do you want this holy water?’ they say, ‘we want to live
happily and comfortably and not get sick.’ There! They’ll never
transcend suffering that way.

The worldly way is to do things for a reason, to get some return, but in
Buddhism we do things without the idea of gaining anything. The world
has to understand things in terms of cause and effect, but the Buddha
teaches us to go above and beyond cause and effect. His wisdom was to go
above cause, beyond effect; to go above birth and beyond death; to go
above happiness and beyond suffering.

Think about it, there’s nowhere to stay. We people live in a ‘home’. To
leave home and go where there is no home, we don’t know how to do it,
because we’ve always lived with becoming, with clinging. If we can’t
cling we don’t know what to do.

So most people don’t want to go to Nibbāna, there’s nothing there;
nothing at all. Look at the roof and the floor here. The upper extreme
is the roof, that’s an ‘abiding’. The lower extreme is the floor, and
that’s another ‘abiding’. But in the empty space between the floor and
the roof there’s nowhere to stand. One could stand on the roof, or stand
on the floor, but not on that empty space. Where there is no abiding,
that’s where there’s emptiness, and Nibbāna is this emptiness.

People hear this and they back up a bit, they don’t want to go. They’re
afraid they won’t see their children or relatives. This is why, when we
bless the laypeople, we say, ‘May you have long life, beauty, happiness
and strength.’ This makes them really happy, they all say. They like
these things. If you start talking about emptiness they don’t want it,
they’re attached to abiding.

But have you ever seen a very old person with a beautiful complexion?
Have you ever seen an old person with a lot of strength, or a lot of
happiness? No, but we say, ‘Long life, beauty, happiness and strength’
and they’re all really pleased, every single one says ! This is like the
Brahmin who makes oblations to achieve some wish.

In our practice we don’t ‘make oblations’, we don’t practise in order to
get some return. We don’t want anything. If we want something then there
is still something there. Just make the mind peaceful and have done with
it. But if I talk like this you may not be very comfortable, because you
want to be ‘born’ again.

All you lay practitioners should get close to the monks and see their
practice. To be close to the monks means to be close to the Buddha, to
be close to his Dhamma. The Buddha said, ‘Ānanda, practise a lot,
develop your practice! Whoever sees the Dhamma sees me, and whoever sees
me sees the Dhamma.’

Where is the Buddha? We may think the Buddha has been and gone, but the
Buddha is the Dhamma, the Truth. Some people like to say, ‘Oh, if I had
been born in the time of the Buddha I would have gone to Nibbāna.’ Here,
stupid people talk like this. The Buddha is still here. The Buddha is
truth. Regardless of whoever is born or dies, the truth is still here.
The truth never departs from the world, it’s there all the time. Whether
a Buddha is born or not, whether someone knows it or not, the truth is
still there.

So we should get close to the Buddha, we should come within and find the
Dhamma. When we reach the Dhamma we will reach the Buddha; seeing the
Dhamma we will see the Buddha, and all doubts will dissolve.

To give a comparison, it’s like teacher Choo. At first he wasn’t a
teacher, he was just Mr. Choo. When he studied and passed the necessary
grades he became a teacher, and became known as teacher Choo. How did he
become a teacher? Through studying the required subjects, thus allowing
Mr. Choo to become teacher Choo. When teacher Choo dies, the study to
become a teacher still remains, and whoever studies it will become a
teacher. That course of study to become a teacher doesn’t disappear
anywhere, just like the Truth, the knowing of which enabled the Buddha
to become the Buddha.

So the Buddha is still here. Whoever practises and sees the Dhamma sees
the Buddha. These days people have got it all wrong, they don’t know
where the Buddha is. They say, ‘If I had been born in the time of the
Buddha I would have become a disciple of his and become enlightened.’
That’s just foolishness.

Don’t go thinking that at the end of the Rains Retreat you’ll disrobe.
Don’t think like that! In an instant an evil thought can arise in the
mind, you could kill somebody. In the same way, it only takes a
split-second for good to flash into the mind, and you’re there already.

And don’t think that you have to ordain for a long time to be able to
meditate. The right practice lies in the instant we make In a flash an
evil thought arises and before you know it you’ve committed some heavy
kamma. In the same way, all the disciples of the Buddha practised for a
long time, but the time they attained enlightenment was merely one
thought moment.

So don’t be heedless, even in minor things. Try hard, try to get close
to the monks, contemplate things and then you’ll know about monks. Well,
that’s enough, huh? It must be getting late now, some people are getting
sleepy. The Buddha said not to teach Dhamma to sleepy people.

[^1]: Venerable Jagaro: the Australian, second Abbot of Wat Pah Nanachat
    at that time, who brought his party of monks and laypeople to see
    Ajahn Chah.
